
--- PAGE 1 ---
Martin Pring 
on Price 
Patterns The Definitive Guide to 
Price Pattern Analysis 
and Interpretation 
Martin J. Pring 
McGraw-Hill 
New York Chicago San Francisco 
Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan 
New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore 
Sydney Toronto 
--- PAGE 2 ---
The McGraw-Hill Companies 
Copyright ┬® 2005 by Martin J. Pring. All rights reserved. Printed in the United 
States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act 
of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form 
or by any means, or stored in a data base or retrieval system, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher. 
4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 0 9 8 
P/N 144194-8 
PART OF 
ISBN 0-07-144038-0 
McGraw-Hill books are available at special quantity discounts to use as pre┬Ł
miums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For 
more information, please write to the Director of Special Sales, Professional 
Publishing, McGraw-Hill, Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2298. Or con┬Ł
tact your local bookstore. 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information 
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that 
neither the author nor the publisher is engaged in rendering legal, accounting, 
or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is 
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. 
ŌĆöFrom a Declaration of principles jointly adopted by a Committee of the American Bar 
Association and a Committee of Publishers. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Pring, Martin J. 
Martin Pring on price patterns : the definitive guide to price pattern 
analysis and interpretation / by Martin J. Pring. 
p. cm. 
ISBN 0-07-144038-0 (hardcover : alk. paper) 
1. Stock price forecasting. 2. Investment analysis. I. Title: on price 
patterns. II. Title. 
HG4637.P75 2004 
332.63'222ŌĆödc22 2004004831 
Contents 
Introduction čā 
Acknowledgments vii 
Part I. Basic Building Blocks 1 
1. Market Psychology and Prices: 
Why Patterns Work 3 
2. Three Introductory Concepts 9 
3. Support and Resistance Zones: 
How to Identify Them 22 
4. Trendlines 35 
5. Volume Principles as They Apply 
to Price Patterns 54 
Part II. Traditional Patterns 69 
6. Using Rectangles, a Case Study 
for All Patterns 71 
7. Head and Shoulders 96 
8. Double Tops, Double Bottoms, 
and Triple Patterns 127 
--- PAGE 3 ---
iv Contents 
9. Triangles 149 
10. Broadening Formations 169 
11. Miscellaneous Patterns 188 
Part III. Short-Term Patterns 209 
12. Smaller Patterns and Gaps 211 
13. Outside Bars 241 
14. Inside Bars 259 
15. Key Reversal, Exhaustion, and Pinocchio Bars 269 
16. Two- and Three-Bar Reversals 289 
Part IV. Miscellaneous Issues 315 
17. How to Assess Whether a Breakout 
Will Be Valid or False 317 
18. How Do Price Patterns Test? 335 
Appendix Individual Patterns Summarized 347 
Index 354 
Introduction 
In 2002, McGraw-Hill published eight of my books and book/CD-ROM tuto┬Ł
rial combinations. As an author, I can tell you that that was a lot of work, 
and one of my 2003 New Year's resolutions was that enough was enough and 
I would not write another book for many years. So much for resolutions, 
because 2003 has seen the birth of this book and the DVD presentation that 
is enclosed in the back, and 2004 will see their publication. 
I first got the idea of writing this book after bumping into Rick Escher of 
Recognia. Recognia is an Ottawa-based software company that is dedicated 
to offering scanning techniques for investors and traders. Its principal vehi┬Ł
cle for this was originally chart pattern recognition, although this has been 
and will be expanded to include other technical and possibly fundamental 
indicators. Accurate scanning software for chart pattern recognition has 
been one of the dreams of technicians for years, and the opportunity to work 
with Recognia on this project and the ability to offer it on our Web site at 
pring.com got me excited enough to come up with this book. 
For those interested, the DVD enclosed at the back of the book offers a 
one-hour presentation taken from my Live in London video series. The con┬Ł
tents have been selected to reinforce many of the topics covered in the 
book. 
Several classic books on technical analysis have covered the subject of 
price patterns in depth. In the 1930s, R. W. Shabacker wrote several books 
on the stock market, of which Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits is the 
most relevant. H. M. Gartley included a large section on this subject in Profits 
and the Stock Market. Perhaps the most notable has been Edwards and 
Magee, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, originally published in 1951 and 
now, under the new editorship of Charles Basatti, expanded to include other 
technical and portfolio management subjects. There is therefore a raft of 
information available on this subject, so why offer more? The answer prob-
--- PAGE 4 ---
vi Introduction 
ably lies in the statement, "There is more than one way to skin a cat." In the 
old days, when charts were plotted by hand, time horizons were much 
longer. Today, with the advent of intraday trading, more emphasis is being 
placed on the short term. While a substantial number of the examples fea┬Ł
tured here rely on daily and weekly charts, quite a few intraday situations 
have also been included. 
The more I study market action, the more I am impressed by the fact that 
prices are determined by the attitudes of market participants toward the 
emerging fundamentals. Consequently, I have tried to expand on the dis┬Ł
cussions in other books concerning the psychological rationale for many of 
the patterns. If it's possible to understand the logic behind these patterns, 
there is a greater probability that they will be more accuratelyŌĆöand, hope┬Ł
fully, more profitablyŌĆöinterpreted. 
A whole section of the book has been devoted to what I call one- and two-
bar price patterns. These formations typically indicate exhaustion and are 
often followed by sharp and timely reversals in trend. They are especially 
suited to the swing and day trader, who is forced by time constraints to act 
quickly. Earlier books covered some of these patterns, but one of the objec┬Ł
tives of this book is to expand on this coverage with some ideas of my own. 
In addition, I have tried to include a few patterns that are not described 
in the classic texts, along with a few personal variations. Also, there are some 
patterns that are described in other books, but that you will not find here. 
There are two reasons for this. First, it may be that they do not appear in 
the charts very often. If I have to hunt through hundreds of years of daily 
data and am hard-pressed to find an example of a specific pattern, that pat┬Ł
tern is hardly of practical day-to-day use. Second, some patterns, such as 
orthodox broadening tops and bottoms, trigger signals so far away from the 
reversal point that much of the new trend's potential has already been 
achieved. Discussion of such formations has been kept to a minimum or 
eliminated altogether. So, too, have explanations of patterns where the 
demarcation boundaries cannot easily and conveniently be drawn. 
Diamonds and rounding formations come to mind. 
No indicator used in technical analysis is perfect, including price patterns. 
In this respect, Chapter 18 summarizes some of the research that Pring 
Research and Recognia have undertaken through the identification of 
5,000 patterns between 1982 and 2003. The results indicate that the two 
types of formation tested, head-and-shoulders and double tops and bottoms, 
generally work when the signals develop in the direction of the primary 
trend. This demonstrates that correct interpretation and application, when 
combined with other indicators, will put the odds in your favor. I say odds 
because technical analysis deals only in probabilities, never in certainties. 
Because of this, it is of paramount importance for all market participants 
Introduction vii 
to first ask the question "What is my risk?" before asking the obvious "What 
is my reward?" This involves mentally rehearsing where the price would need 
to go in order to indicate that a pattern had failed. Any good driver looks 
through the rearview mirror prior to overtaking the car ahead. Traders and 
investors should do the same by identifying risk before assessing any poten┬Ł
tial reward 
Acknowledgments 
There are several people whom I would like to thank for their help and 
encouragement in writing this book. The idea originally came to me after 
I bumped into my new friends at Recognia, a Canadian software company 
devoted to pattern recognition software. In particular, I would like to thank 
the president of Recognia, Rick Escher, who has provided me with several 
ideas and has made possible the launching of a pattern recognition sub┬Ł
scription service at our Web site, pring.com. My thanks go also to Bob 
Pelltier at csidata.com for kindly providing the historical data used for the 
research in Chapter 18. 
The DVD at the back of the book was shot as part of a Live in London video 
series. Permission to include the excerpts featured in the DVD was gener┬Ł
ously given by my friend and the sponsor of the conference, Vince 
Stanzione, atwww.commodities-trader.com. United Kingdom-based traders 
looking for some quality instruction may well want to look him up. 
Finally, and as usual, exceptional thanks goes to my wife, Lisa, who stead┬Ł
fastly applied herself to re-creating all the illustrations featured in the book 
from my miserable original specimens despite a house move and personal 
sadness caused by a close family bereavement. 
--- PAGE 5 ---
To Lisa, who never fails to surprise me on the upside 
PART I 
Basic Building 
Blocks 
--- PAGE 6 ---
1 Market Psychology 
and Prices: Why 
Patterns Work 
The more I work with markets, the more it becomes apparent that prices 
are determined by one thing and one thing only, and that is people's chang┬Ł
ing attitudes toward the emerging fundamentals. In other words, prices are 
determined by psychology. The great technician of the 1940s, Garfield Drew, 
once wrote, "Stocks don't sell for what they are worth, but for what people 
think they are worth." If it were not for the fact that these changing atti┬Ł
tudes move in trends and that trends tend to perpetuate, market prices 
would be nothing more than a random event, which would mean that tech┬Ł
nicians would be out of business. 
Changing Attitudes and Changing 
Prices 
A classic example of changing attitudes that affected prices developed in 
the 1970s and early 1980s. In 1973, a group of stocks known as the "Nifty 
Fifty" peaked after a phenomenal rise during the 1960s. These were known 
in the trade as "one-decision" stocks, because their earnings went up every 
year, as did their prices. People came to the conclusion that there was only 
one decision to make where these stocks were concerned: just buy! These 
stocks included such growth names of the time as Kodak, Xerox, 
McDonald's, and IBM. During 1973 and 1974, they declined substantially 
in price, along with the rest of the market. Over the course of the next nine 
3 
--- PAGE 7 ---
4 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
years or so, the earnings for the group as a whole continued to rise, but 
the index did not make a new post-1973 high until nine years later. 
Thus we arrive at a situation where prices bear no reality to the earnings 
trend. Perhaps prices were too high in 1973 relative to the earnings; per┬Ł
haps they were not, and they should have continued rising throughout the 
1970s as earnings rose. Who knows? Who can tell? Technicians would say, 
"Who cares?" Why? Because technical analysis assumes that the changing 
attitudes toward these emerging fundamentals are reflected in price action 
as displayed in charts. It's not dissimilar to a medical technician looking at 
a patient's chart. He doesn't have to know that the patient is groaning with 
pain to diagnose a problem. It's all there in the chart. The chart tells him 
that the patient's vital signs are deteriorating to the point where danger lies 
ahead and that remedial action should be taken. In a similar way, to the tech┬Ł
nician, poor price action signifies a weak price trend and the probability of 
trouble ahead in the form of a serious price decline. The technician does 
not have to know the reason why; he merely observes the condition and 
takes the necessary action. 
Chart 1-1 shows the 1990s price action for Key Corp., a money-center 
bank. The bank's earnings are shown in the lower panel. Note that there 
are two periods when the price came down for a prolonged period, the first 
in the 1980s and the second in the late 1990s. In both cases the earnings 
rose, demonstrating once again that it is the attitude of market participants 
toward the emerging fundamentals rather than the fundamentals them┬Ł
selves that is important. This is not the same thing as saying that earnings 
are not important; of course they are. If we had known that earnings were 
Chart 1-1 Key Corp. 1990-2002 vs. earnings. (Source: Telescan.) 
Market Psychology and Prices: Why Patterns Work 
Chart 1-2 eBay 1998-2003 vs. earnings. (Source: Telescan.) 
going to rise at the beginning of both these periods, it would have been rea┬Ł
sonable for us to assume that the price would rally as well. Only a review of 
the technical position could have helped us to conclude otherwise. 
Chart 1-2 shows another example, featuring eBay. Once again we can see 
that the earnings increased pretty dramatically throughout the period cov┬Ł
ered by the chart. However, the price fell slightly, showing the futility of buy┬Ł
ing and selling stocks based purely upon accurate earnings estimates. 
History repeats, but never exactly, and as prices approach a turning point, 
people react in roughly the same way. It is this similarity of behavior that 
shows up in identifiable price patterns or formations, and that is the subject 
of this book. Later on we will classify these various formations, establish their 
reliability, and explain how they can be used as a basis for trading. 
Technical Analysis Defined 
At the outset, it is very important to understand that technical analysis is an 
art form. Indeed I define it as "the art of identifying a trend reversal at a rel┬Ł
atively early stage and riding on that trend until the weight of the evidence shows 
or proves that the trend has reversed." You have probably noticed that I have 
emphasized the words weight of the evidence. This is because price patterns should 
be looked upon as one indicator in the weight-of-fhe-evidence approach. In 
other words, we should not look at price patterns in isolation, but consider 
--- PAGE 8 ---
6 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
mem in conjunction with several other indicators. Over the years, technicians 
have developed literally thousands of indicators, so it is obviously impossible 
to follow them all. By "weight of the evidence" I mean four or five indicators 
that the user feels comfortable with. The world's great religions are all primarily 
concerned with finding the truth, but each has its own way of getting there. 
So, too, with technical analysis; what one person sees as a great indicator 
another may discard as useless. It's important for you as an individual to decide 
which indicators to adopt in your trading by testing them over a period of time. 
If you do not have confidence in your choices, I can assure you that you will 
make wrong trading decisions once the trend goes against you. 
By this point you may be asking, "What does he mean by indicators?" Well, 
I mean oscillators such as the RSI, stochastic, KST, and so on. Other 
approaches include Elliott, Gann, or the Wykoff method. Still others rely 
on cycles, volume, or trend-following indicators, such as moving averages 
and trendlines. Price patterns are therefore one indicator in this weight-of-
the-evidence approach. I strongly believe that they should not be used in 
isolation, but rather should be used in conjunction with several of these 
other indicators with which you feel comfortable. Price patterns should not 
be used blindly; they should be interpreted and applied with a full under┬Ł
standing of the underlying psychology that gives rise to their development. 
If you understand roughly how and why they work, you will be in a better 
position to interpret them in difficult situations. 
Price Patterns and Psychology 
I have used the word trend several times, but what is a trend? In my view, a 
trend is a period in which a price moves in an irregular but persistent direction. There 
will be a lot said on the subject of trends in the next chapter, but for now all 
we need to know is that there are various classes depending upon the time 
frame under consideration. For example, a 60-minute bar chart will reflect 
very short trends, and a monthly bar chart will reflect trends of much greater 
duration, lasting for years. However, the principles of interpretation are iden┬Ł
tical. The only difference is that reversals of trends on intraday charts have 
nowhere near the significance of those on the monthly charts. It should be 
assumed that the longer the time span, the more reliable the signal. It is 
important to understand that this last statement is a generalization, since some 
short-term signals can be very reliable and some long-term signals less reli┬Ł
able. The reason why longer-term trends have a habit of being slightly more 
reliable is that they are less subject to random noise and manipulation. 
When a trend is underway, it means that either buyers or sellers are in con┬Ł
trol. During an uptrend, it is the buyers, and during a downtrend, the sellers. 
Market Psychology and Prices: Why Patterns Work 7 
I have often heard people respond to the question, "Why is so and so going 
up?" with the flippant answer, "Because there are more buyers than sellers!" 
Well, strictly speaking, this is not true, because every transaction must be 
equally balanced. If I sell 1,000 shares, there must be one or more buyers 
who are willing to purchase that 1,000 shares. There can never be more, and 
there can never be less. What moves prices is the enthusiasm of buyers rela┬Ł
tive to that of sellers. If buyers are more motivated, they will bid prices higher. 
On the other hand, if sellers are more motivated, then the savvy buyers will 
wait for the sellers to come down to their bids, and prices will decline. 
Technicians have noted over the years that prices do not usually reverse 
on a dime. There is usually a transitional period between those times when 
buyers have the upper hand and those when sellers are pressing prices lower. 
During these transitional phases, prices experience trading ranges. This 
ranging action often takes the form of clearly identifiable price patterns or 
formations. If these transitional periods are classified as a horizontal trend, 
it follows that there are three possible trends: up, down, and sideways. 
Occasionally prices will resolve these horizontal price movements in favor 
of the previous prevailing trend. In this case, the temporary battle between 
buyers and sellers turns out, in retrospect, to be a period of consolidation. 
Such formations would then be termed consolidation or continuation patterns, 
since the prevailing trend would continue after their completion. By the 
same token, if a pattern separates an uptrend from a downtrend or a down┬Ł
trend from an uptrend, the formation would be called a reversal pattern. 
It is a generally known fact that rising prices attract bullish sentiment and 
vice versa. When prices begin their ascent, most people do not anticipate a 
large sell-off. This is because the news background remains very positive and 
people generally extrapolate the recent past. It is only after prices have been 
falling for some time that bad news becomes believable. This means that 
when we spot a bearish-looking pattern after a previously bullish trend, it is 
unlikely that we will believe its bearish omen. In fact, we could say that the 
less believable the pattern, the greater the odds that it is going to work. 
Let's look at it another way. Say the gold market has been rallying for 
months and there are widespread media reports telling us that gold and gold 
shares have outperformed the stock market. In this kind of environment, 
analysts and other market participants typically expect more of the same. 
It's possible that there is also a scary geopolitical background; for example, 
oil supplies may be threatened. However, the gold price forms a reversal 
price pattern. At the time it would be inconceivable that this pattern could 
"work," but that is precisely the time when it is most likely to do so. The tip-
off 
might come if the news becomes exceptionally bullish as a result of some 
destabilizing geopolitical event, but the price does not make a new high. That 
will give the bearish technical case substantial credibility, for if unexpected 
--- PAGE 9 ---
8 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
"good" news (for gold) cannot send the price higher, what will? Nothing, 
because this news is already factored into the price. Such action tells us that the 
underlying technical position is not as strong as it appears on the surface. 
It's the market's way of saying, forget the media hype, bullish sentiment, and 
what you hope will happen. Instead, focus on what the market is actually 
telling you and act on that. The problem is that when everyone around you 
is convinced that a specific trend is going to extend, it is very difficult to 
take a different stance. Only after taking a series of losses because you 
believed the crowd rather than the market action are you likely to learn the 
lesson that the market speaks the truth and crowds speak with forked 
tongues. 
2 Three Introductory 
Concepts 
Introduction 
Before we proceed to a discussion of price patterns themselves, it is impor┬Ł
tant for us to lay the groundwork by describing a few introductory concepts. 
By doing so, it is possible to obtain a firmer foundation and a better under┬Ł
standing of how markets work, and we will then be in a better position to 
interpret and apply price patterns for more profitable trading and invest┬Ł
ing. This chapter will describe the importance and implications of time 
frames and trends. It will conclude with a discussion of peak-and-trough 
analysis and the pros and cons of logarithmic versus arithmetic scaling. 
Incidentally, I will be using the word security extensively. This term is a 
generic one and avoids the constant use of stocks, commodities, currencies, 
bonds, etc. Just think of a security as any freely traded entity and you will 
be on the right track. 
Time Frames 
We have already established the link between psychology and prices. It is also 
a fact that human nature (psychology) is more or less constant. This means 
that the principles of technical analysis can be applied to any time frame, 
from one-minute bars to weekly and monthly charts. The interpretation is 
identical. The only difference is that the battle between buyers and sellers is 
much larger on the monthly charts than on the intraday ones. This means 
9 
--- PAGE 10 ---
10 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
that any trend-reversal signals are far more significant on the longer charts. 
As we proceed, it will be evident that this book contains a huge variety of 
examples featuring many different time frames. For the purpose of interpreta┬Ł
tion, the timeframe really doesn't matter; it's the character of the pattern that does. 
For example, if you are a long-term trader and you see a particular example 
featured on a 10-minute bar chart, the example is just as relevant as it would 
be to an intraday trader. The long-term trader would never initiate a trade 
based on a 10-minute chart, but that trader can and should take action when 
that same pattern appears on a weekly or monthly one, and vice versa. 
Trends 
A trend is a period in which a price moves in an irregular but persistent direction 
and is a time measurement of the direction in price levels. There are many 
different classifications of trends in technical analysis. It is useful to exam┬Ł
ine the more common ones, since an understanding of them will give us 
perspective on the significance of specific price patterns. The three most 
widely followed trends are primary, intermediate, and short-term trends. 
Whenever we talk of any specific category of trend as lasting for such and 
such a time period, please remember that the description is offered as a 
rough guide, encompassing most, but not all, trends of that particular type. 
Some trends will last longer, and others for less time. 
Primary 
The primary trend revolves around the business cycle, which extends for 
approximately 3.6 years from trough to trough. Rising and falling primary 
trends (bull and bear markets) last for 1 to 2 years. Since building takes longer 
than tearing down, bull markets generally last longer than bear markets. 
The primary trend is illustrated in Fig. 2-1 by the thickest line. In an 
ideal situation, the magnitude and duration of the primary uptrend (bull 
market) are identical to those of the primary downtrend (bear market), 
but in reality, they are usually very different. Price patterns that offer rever┬Ł
sal signals for primary trends usually take longer than three months to 
complete. 
Intermediate 
It is unusual for prices to move in straight lines, so primary up- and down┬Ł
trends are almost always interrupted by countercyclical corrections along the 
Three Introductory Concepts 11 
Figure 2-1 The market cycle model. (Source: pring.com adapted from Yelton Fiscal.) 
way. These trends are called intermediate price movements, and they last any┬Ł
where from six weeks to as long as nine months. Occasionally they last even 
longer, and some writers classify some trends that take as little as three weeks 
to complete as intermediate price movements. The intermediate trend is 
represented in Fig. 2-1 by the thinner solid line. Price patterns that signal 
reversals in intermediate trends do not take as long to form as those revers┬Ł
ing primary price movements. As a rough guide, I would say three to six 
weeks. A lot will depend on the magnitude and duration of the intermedi┬Ł
ate trend leading into the formation. 
Short-Term 
As a rough guide, short-term trends (the dashed line in Fig. 2-1) typically 
last three or four weeks, although they are sometimes shorter and often 
longer. They interrupt the course of the intermediate trend, just as the inter┬Ł
mediate trend interrupts primary price movements. Short-term trends are 
usually influenced by random news events and are far more difficult to iden┬Ł
tify than their intermediate or primary counterparts. Price patterns in this 
case would take one to two weeks to develop. 
The formation time varies a great deal, so the estimates provided here 
should be used as approximate guides. Quite often almost the whole of 
the trend is taken up by the formation of the pattern. We will show some 
examples later on when some of these formations have actually been 
defined. 
--- PAGE 11 ---
12 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
The Interaction of Trends 
It is apparent by now that the price level of any security is influenced simul┬Ł
taneously by several different trends. Indeed, there are many more types of 
trend, some longer and some shorter than the three we have just been 
describing. These too have an influence on price. Whenever we are con┬Ł
sidering a specific price pattern, our first objective is to understand which 
type of trend is being reversed. For example, if a reversal in a short-term 
trend has just taken place, a much smaller price movement may be expected 
than if the pattern was reversing a primary trend. 
Short-term traders are principally concerned with smaller movements in 
price, but they also need to know the direction of the intermediate and primary 
trends. This is because these longer-term trends dominate near-term price 
action. This means that any surprises will develop in the direction of the 
primary trend. In a bull market, the surprises will be on the upside, and in 
a bear market, they will be on the downside. Just think of it this way: Rising 
short-term trends that develop in a bull market are likely to be much greater 
in magnitude than short-term downtrends, and vice versa. Trading losses usu┬Ł
ally happen when the trader is positioned in a countercyclical position against the 
main trend. The implication for price patterns is that if a false signal is to be 
given, it will almost always develop in a manner countercyclical to the trend 
above it. For example, a security may be in a primary bear market. If it then 
traces out a bullish intermediate price formation, chances are that this 
breakout will turn out to be false because it is countercyclical in nature. We 
cannot say that all bullish patterns that develop in bearish trends will fail. 
What we can say, though, is that if a failure is going to take place, it is most 
likely to happen following a countercyclical breakout. 
Intraday Trends 
What is true for longer-term trends is also true for intraday data. In this 
case, the short-term trend in the daily charts becomes the long-term trend 
in the intraday charts. Figure 2-2 represents three rough time approxima┬Ł
tions for the short-term, intermediate, and long-term trends in intraday 
charts. Patterns on these charts have two principal differences from those 
appearing on the longer-term ones. First, their effect is of much shorter 
duration. Second, extremely short-term price trends are much more influ┬Ł
enced by instant reactions to news events than are longer-term ones. 
Decisions, therefore, have a tendency to develop as emotional, knee-jerk 
reactions. Also, intraday price action is more susceptible to manipulation. 
As a consequence, price data used in very-short-term charts are much more 
erratic and generally less reliable than those that appear in the longer-term 
charts. 
Three Introductory Concepts 13 
Figure 2-2 The intraday market cycle model. 
The Secular Trend 
The primary trend consists of several intermediate cycles, but the secular 
or very-long-term, trend is constructed from a number of primary trends' 
This "super cycle," or long wave, extends over a substantially greater 
period, usually lasting well over 10 years and often as long as 25 years A 
diagram of the interrelationship between a secular and a primary trend is 
shown in Fig. 2-3. It is certainly very helpful to understand the direction 
Figure 2-3 The secular versus the cyclical trend. 
--- PAGE 12 ---
14 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
of the secular trend. Just as the primary trend influences the magnitude of 
the intermediate-term rally relative to the countercyclical reaction, so the 
secular trend influences the magnitude and duration of a primary-trend rally 
or reaction. For example, in a rising secular trend, primary bull markets will 
be of greater magnitude than primary bear markets. In a secular downtrend, 
bear markets will be more powerful, and will take longer to unfold, than 
bull markets. Price patterns that reverse secular trends are obviously much 
larger than those that separate a primary bull and bear market, often form┬Ł
ing over many years. By the same token, they are also much rarer. 
Peak-and-Trough Progression 
Widespread use of computers has led to the development of very sophisti┬Ł
cated trend-identification techniques in market analysis. Some of these work 
reasonably well, but most do not. In the rush to develop these more com┬Ł
plicated approaches, the simplest and most basic techniques of technical 
analysis are often overlooked. One of these is the peak-and-trough approach. 
It is one piece of evidence in the weight-of-the-evidence approach described 
earlier, but it is also the building block for several price patterns. 
The concept is very simple. A rising trend typically consists of a series of ral┬Ł
lies and reactions. Each high is higher than its predecessor, as is each low. When 
the series of rising peaks and troughs is interrupted, a trend reversal is signaled. 
In Fig. 2-4, the price has been advancing in a series of waves, with each 
peak and each trough being higher than its predecessor. Then, for the first 
time, a rally fails to move to a new high, and the subsequent reaction pushes 
Three Introductory Concepts 15 
Figure 2-5 Peak-and-trough reversal and test. 
it below the previous trough. This occurs at point A and gives a signal that, as 
far as the peak-and-trough indicator is concerned, the trend has reversed. 
Point ąÆ in Fig. 2-4 shows a similar situation, but this time the trend reversal 
is from a downtrend to an uptrend. 
The significance of a peak-and-trough reversal is determined by the dura┬Ł
tion and magnitude of the rallies and reactions in question. 
For example, if it takes two to three weeks to complete each wave in a 
series of rallies and reactions, the trend reversal will be an intermediate one, 
since intermediate price movements consist of a series of short-term (two-
to three-week) fluctuations. Similarly, the interruption of a series of falling 
intermediate peaks and troughs by a rising one signals a reversal from a pri┬Ł
mary bear to a primary bull market. 
In Fig. 2-4 the price falls back to the level of the initial recovery high, but 
in Fig. 2-5 it drops below it. This is still a bullish situation because the ris┬Ł
ing peaks and troughs remain intact. 
A Peak-and-Trough Dilemma 
Occasionally, peak-and-trough progression becomes more complicated than 
the examples shown in Figs. 2-4 and 2-5. In Fig. 2-6, the market has been 
advancing in a series of rising peaks and troughs, but following the highest 
peak, the price declines at point Xto a level that is below the previous low. 
At this juncture, the series of rising troughs has been broken, but not the 
series of rising peaks. In other words, at point X, only half a signal has been 
generated. The complete signal of a reversal of both rising peaks and troughs 
--- PAGE 13 ---
16 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 2-6 Peak-and-trough half signal at a top. 
arises at point Y, when the price slips below the level previously reached at 
point X, having failed in its attempt to register a new high. 
At point X, there is quite a dilemma because the trend should still be clas┬Ł
sified as positive, and yet the very fact that the series of rising troughs has 
been interrupted indicates underlying technical weakness. On the one 
hand, we are presented with half a bearish signal, while on the other, wait┬Ł
ing for point Y could mean giving up a substantial amount of the profits 
earned during the bull market. The problem is that if we do not wait, the 
price could well extend its uptrend, as in Fig. 2-7. 
Figure 2-7 Peak-and-trough continuation. 
Three Introductory Concepts 17 
Figure 2-8 Peak-and-trough half signal at a bottom. 
That's why the dilemma is probably best dealt with by referring to the 
weight of the evidence from other technical indicators, such as moving 
averages (MAs), volume, momentum, and so on. If these other techniques 
overwhelmingly indicate a trend reversal, it is probably safe to anticipate a 
change in trend, even though peak-and-trough progression has not com┬Ł
pletely confirmed the reversal. It is still a wise policy, though, to view this sig┬Ł
nal with some degree of skepticism until the reversal is confirmed by an 
interruption in both the series of rising peaks and the series of rising 
troughs. 
Figure 2-8 shows this type of situation for a reversal from a bear to a bull 
trend. The same principles of interpretation apply at point Xas in Fig. 2-6. 
What Constitutes a Legitimate Peak and Trough? 
Most of the time, the various rallies and reactions are self-evident, so it is easy 
to determine that these turning points are legitimate peaks and troughs. It is 
generally assumed that a reaction to the prevailing trend should retrace 
between one-third and two-thirds of the previous trend. This means that if we 
take the first rally from the trough low to the subsequent peak in Fig. 2-9 as 
100 percent, the ensuing correction should be anywhere from one-third to 
two-thirds of that move. In this case it appears to be just over one-half, or a 
50 percent retracement of the previous move. Occasionally, the retracement 
can reach 100 percent. Technical analysis is far from precise, but if a retrace┬Ł
ment move is a good deal less than the minimum one-third, then the peak 
or trough in question is held to be suspect. 
--- PAGE 14 ---
18 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 2-9 Peak-and-trough determination (magnitude). 
There is one exception to this rule. Occasionally a correction takes the 
form of a sideways trading range rather than an advance or decline. Since 
the trading range is still an interruption of the dominant trend and there┬Ł
fore reflect a psychological correction, we can still use the one,hird to two-
thirds rule, but in this instance substituting time for magnitude. This idea 
Is shown in Fig. 2-10, where the correction should last between one-third 
and two-thirds of the time taken to complete the rally leading up to it. The 
Figure 2-10 Peak-and-trough determination (time). 
Three Introductory Concepts 19 
same principles are applied to trading ranges and rallies that develop 
within downtrends. 
It is also important to categorize what kind of trend is being monitored. 
Obviously a reversal derived from a series of rallies and reactions each last┬Ł
ing, say, two to three weeks would be an intermediate reversal. This is 
because the swings would be short-term in nature. On the other hand, peak-
and-trough reversals that develop in intraday charts are likely to have sig┬Ł
nificance over a much shorter period. How short would depend on whether 
the swings were a reflection of hourly or, say, five-minute bars. 
Arithmetic or Logarithmic 
Scaling? 
There are two axes on any market chart. The x axis, along the bottom, reg┬Ł
isters the date (except in point-and-figure charting), and the čā axis, the price. 
There are two methods of plotting the čā axis, arithmetic and logarithmic. 
And which one is chosen can have very important implications. 
Arithmetic charts allocate a specific point or dollar amount to a given ver┬Ł
tical distance. Thus, in Chart 2-1, each arrow has the same vertical distance 
and reflects approximately 200 points. That will be true at any price level. 
Chart 2-1 S&P Composite, 1900-2003, arithmetic scale. 
--- PAGE 15 ---
20 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Chart 2-2 S&P Composite, 1900-2003, logarithmic scale. 
A logarithmic scale, on the other hand, allocates a given percentage price 
move to a specific vertical distance. In Chart 2-2, each arrow represents a 
move of approximately 100 percent, whether it is at lower prices or higher 
prices. There is very little noticeable difference between the scaling meth┬Ł
ods when charts are plotted over short periods of time, where price fluctu┬Ł
ations are relatively subdued. However, with large price fluctuations, there 
are considerable differences. 
The arithmetic scale suppresses price fluctuations at low levels and exag┬Ł
gerates them at high points. Thus the 85 percent 1929-1932 decline hardly 
shows up at all in Chart 2-1, but the 40 percent late 1990s-early 2000s retreat 
(no small decline) is greatly exaggerated. Chart 2-2 shows that the loga┬Ł
rithmic scaling brings back 1929 and does not exaggerate the turn-of-the-
century bear market. The media love to hype stories and news because that 
is what sells. You will find that charts featuring financial markets or economic 
numbers are almost always plotted on an arithmetic scale because this has 
the effect of exaggerating the most recent changes. Another hyping tech┬Ł
nique used by the media is to present the data for a short period using a 
very limited scale. The reader is then left with the sense of a dramatic move. 
This would not be the case if the data were displayed over a much longer 
period using a wider price scale. 
As you can appreciate, I am very much in favor of using a logarithmic scale 
because it displays price trends in a proportionate way. Psychology tends to 
Three Introductory Concepts 21 
move proportionately as well, so it makes perfect rational sense to use loga┬Ł
rithmic scaling. Having said that, when price fluctuations are relatively small, 
say over a three-month period, there is very little difference between the two 
scaling methods. As a purist, though, I still prefer the log scale at all times. 
There is an even more important advantage of the logarithmic scale, 
which we shall learn when the concept of pattern price objectives is dis┬Ł
cussed later. 
Summary 
ŌĆó The principles of technical analysis can be applied equally to any time 
frame. 
ŌĆó The longer the time frame the greater the significance of any technical 
signal. 
ŌĆó A number of different trends simultaneously influence the price level of 
any market; primary, intermediate, and short term are the most impor┬Ł
tant. 
ŌĆó Peak-and-trough progression is the most basic trend-identification tech┬Ł
nique and is a central building block of price pattern analysis. 
ŌĆó In order to qualify as a new legitimate peak or trough a good rule of 
thumb is that the price should retrace between one-third and two-thirds 
of the previous move. 
ŌĆó Arithmetic scaling suppresses price fluctuations at lower price levels and 
exaggerates them at higher levels. 
--- PAGE 16 ---
3 Support and 
Resistance Zones: 
How to Identify 
Them 
Support and resistance are two more building blocks of the technical arse┬Ł
nal used in price pattern analysis. A discussion of these two concepts will 
therefore help us greatly in our understanding of how price patterns work. 
A lot of people use the term support when they really mean resistance and 
use resistance when they really mean support. It's no wonder that there is a 
lot of confusion. Basically, these are points on a chart where the probabili┬Ł
ties favor at least a temporary halt in the prevailing trend. 
Support and Resistance 
In their classic book Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, Edwards and Magee 
defined support as "buying (actual or potential) sufficient in volume to halt 
a downtrend in prices for an appreciable period," and resistance as "selling 
(actual or potential) sufficient in volume to satisfy all bids and hence stop 
prices from going higher for a time." 
A support zone represents a concentration of demand, and a resistance zone 
represents a concentration of supply. The word concentration is emphasized 
because supply and demand are always in balance, but it is the relative enthu┬Ł
siasm of buyers as compared to sellers, or vice versa, that is important because 
that is what determines trends. If buyers are more enthusiastic than sellers, 
Support and Resistance Zones: How to Identify Them 23 
Figure 3-1 Previous low is a good place to expect support. 
they will continually increase their bids until their purchasing demands have 
been satisfied. On the other hand, if sellers are the more anxious, then they 
will be willing to liquidate at lower prices and the general price level will fall. 
If in doubt, think of support as a temporary floor for prices and resistance 
as a ceiling. 
At the beginning of Fig. 3-1, the price is declining. It finds a bottom at A 
and then moves up. The next time it falls to A, it again rallies, so A may now 
be said to be a support area. This establishes our first principle of sup┬Ł
port/resistance analysis: A previous high or low is a potential resistance/support 
level. The third time the price slips to A, it goes through or, as we say, vio┬Ł
lates support. One of the first principles of identifying a potential support 
level, then, is to look for previous lows. In the case of potential resistance, 
this would be in the area of a previous high. 
Figure 3-2 shows a more extended example. This time the price found 
temporary support at ąÆ. ąĪ also proves to be a support point, but note that 
Figure 3-2 Support reverses its role to resistance on the way back up. 
--- PAGE 17 ---
24 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 3-3 Resistance reverses its role to support on the way down. 
the rallies are reversed at support level B. Thus the second principle is that 
support reverses its role to resistance on the way up. Just think of it this way: A 
floor in a building acts as a support zone, but when you fall through it, the 
floor now becomes resistance, called a ceiling. The reason why support and 
resistance reverse their roles can be appreciated with an explanation of 
some elementary psychology. No one likes to take a loss, and while some 
people overcome this feeling by cutting their losses at an early stage, oth┬Ł
ers hold on until the price comes back to where the security in question 
was originally bought. At that point they are able to break even and sell, 
thereby creating a quantity of supply sufficient to temporarily halt the 
advance. 
Finally, in Fig. 3-3 we see the price rally through resistance at ąÆ and A (the 
former support level). The ensuing decline then finds support at A again. 
Thus our third principle is that resistance reverses its role to support on the way 
down. 
Rules for Determining Potential 
Support/Resistance Points 
1. Previous Highs and Lows 
We have already established that previous highs and lows are potential sup┬Ł
port or resistance levels. Highs are important because many market partic┬Ł
ipants may have bought close to or at the actual high for a move. When 
prices decline, the normal human response is not to take a loss but to hold 
on. That way, it is felt, there will not be the pain of actually realizing a loss. 
Support and Resistance Zones: How to Identify Them 25 
Consequently, when the price returns to the old high, those who bought at 
that level have great motivation to sell in order to break even, so they begin 
to liquidate. Also, those who bought at lower prices have a tendency to take 
profits at the old high, since that is the top of familiar ground. By the same 
token, any prices above the old high look expensive to potential buyers; con┬Ł
sequently, there is less enthusiasm on their part, so they begin to pull away 
from the market. 
When a price rallies and then falls back to the previous low, these bar┬Ł
gain basement prices appeal to potential buyers. After all, they missed the 
opportunity the first time prices retreated to this level, and they are there┬Ł
fore thankful to have another chance. For the same reason, sellers are reluc┬Ł
tant to part with their securities as prices approach the previous low, since 
they saw them bounce before and naturally wonder why the same process 
should not be repeated. 
Chart 3-1 shows the sugar price for a period spanning 2002-2003. Note 
how previous highs and lows offer good support/resistance points for 
future trading. Unfortunately, there is no way of knowing whether a par┬Ł
ticular level will turn out to be support or resistance, or even whether it will 
be a pivotal point at all. That's why these are merely intelligent places for 
anticipating a temporary reversal. Resort to other indicators such as oscil┬Ł
lators is therefore required. 
Chart 3-1 Sugar, 2002-2003, daily. 
--- PAGE 18 ---
26 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
2. At Round Numbers 
Support and resistance zones have a habit of forming at round numbers. 
This is probably because numbers such as 10, 50, or 100 represent easy psy┬Ł
chological points upon which traders and investors often base their deci┬Ł
sions. In the 1970s, for example, the Dow Jones Industrials had a great deal 
of difficulty surpassing the 1000 level. For gold in the 1980s and mid-1990s, 
the magic number was $400, and so forth. The guide for potential turning 
points, then, is to look for round numbers. 
3. Trendlines and Moving Averages Represent Dynamic 
Levels of Support and Resistance 
A good trendline should reflect the underlying trend. One of the rules for 
assessing the significance of a line relates to how many times it has been 
touched or approached. The more the merrier in this case. If a price falls 
back to a specific low on several occasions, this makes that particular price 
level a strong support zone. The same is true of trendlines and moving aver┬Ł
ages (MAs). Every time a price moves back to an up trendline or a rising 
MA and bounces, it is reinforced as a dynamic level of support. The same 
would be true in reverse for a declining trendline or moving average. It 
therefore makes sense to buy as the price falls to an up trendline (or rising 
MA) and to sell when it rises to a down trendline (or rising MA). A low-risk 
stop may then be placed just beyond the line or MA in case the 
support/ resistance zone is violated. 
Chart 3-2, for Hewlett-Packard, shows a very good example of how a down 
trendline acted as resistance. Note also that the interaction of a reliable MA, 
such as the 200-day MA featured in this chart, acts as reinforcement of the 
resistance zone. This works in the same way as if we were building a house 
and doubled the thickness of the roof. The identical principle holds when 
a moving average and a trendline are at the same level; they double the 
strength of the resistance (or support in the case of an up trendline and 
MA intersection). 
4. Emotional Points on a Chart Represent Potential 
Support/Resistance Levels 
This concept will be covered in subsequent chapters when we consider gaps, 
extreme points of Pinocchio bars, two-bar reversals, key reversals, and so 
forth. For the moment, suffice it to say that most emotional points are those 
at which prices following a strong and persistent trend experience a strong 
extension of that trend. During the course of the bar's formation, they then 
abruptly reverse their direction. 
Support and Resistance Zones: How to Identify Them 27 
Chart 3-2 Hewlett-Packard, 2001-2002, daily. 
Gaps represent another example of emotional points. They are formed 
when buyers or sellers respond so emotionally to news that a blank space, 
or gap, is left on the chart. In Chart 3-3, probably because of unexpected 
bad news, the sugar price experiences three downside gaps. Later on, when 
emotions become more stable, the price rallies and tries to "close" each of 
Chart 3-3 March, 2003, sugar. 
--- PAGE 19 ---
28 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Chart 3-4 Boeing, 1998-2003, weekly. 
the gaps. In the case of the gap on the left, resistance is found at the gap's 
opening. In the other two examples, resistance forms at the lower part of 
the gap. Gaps are one of the most reliable technical concepts from the point 
of view of projecting potential support or resistance areas. 
Chart 3-4, for Boeing, shows another emotional point. This time it's the 
bottom of a very wide bar in early 2002. Note that this low developed at a 
round number, $50. Normally this would have been a support level the next 
time the price fell to $50, but in the fall of 2002 the price went right through 
it. Even so, $50 did turn out to be a pivotal point the next time Boeing ral┬Ł
lied. It goes to show that even if a support/resistance zone is violated once, 
it can still turn out to be a pivotal point in subsequent price action. 
5. Proportionate Moves, Retracements, and So On 
The law of motion states that for every action, there is a reaction. Price 
trends established in financial markets are really the measurement of crowd 
psychology in motion and are also subject to this law. These swings in sen┬Ł
timent often show up in proportionate price moves. 
Perhaps the best-known principle of proportion is the 50 percent rule. For 
instance, many bear markets, as measured by the DJIA, have cut prices by 
half. As examples, the 1901-1903, 1907, 1919-1921, and 1937-1938 bear 
markets recorded declines of 46, 49, 47, and 50 percent, respectively. The 
Support and Resistance Zones: How to Identify Them 
29 
first leg of the 1929-1932 bear market ended in October 1929 at 195, just 
over half the September high. The halfway mark in an advance sometimes 
represents the point of balance, often giving a clue to the ultimate extent 
of the move in question or, alternatively, indicating an important juncture 
point for the return move. Thus, between 1970 and 1973, the market 
advanced from 628 to 1067. The halfway point in that rise was 848, or 
approximately the same level at which the first stage of the 1973-1974 bear 
market ended. 
By the same token, rising markets often find resistance after doubling from 
a low; the first rally from 40 to 81 in the 1932-1937 bull market was a double. 
In effect, the 50 percent mark falls in the middle of the one-third to two-
thirds retracement described in Chapter 2 in the discussion of peak-and-
trough progression. These one-third and two-thirds proportions can be 
widely observed in all securities and also serve as support or resistance 
zones. 
Ratio-scale charts are helpful in determining such points, since moves of 
identical proportion can easily be projected up and down. Moreover, these 
swings occur with sufficient consistency to offer possible reversal points at both 
peaks and troughs. Remember, technical analysis deals with probabilities, which 
means that forecasts should not be made using this method in isolation. 
In addition, when undertaking a projection based on the rules of pro┬Ł
portion, it is always a good idea to see whether the price objective corre┬Ł
sponds to a previous support or resistance point. If it does, the odds are 
much higher that this zone will represent a reversal point, or at least a tem┬Ł
porary barrier. When a security price is reaching new all-time high ground, 
another possibility is to try to extend up trendlines. The point at which the 
line intersects with the projection using the rules of proportion may well 
represent the time and place of an important reversal. Experimentation will 
show that each security has a character of its own, with some lending them┬Ł
selves more readily to this approach and others not at all. 
Chart 3-5, for Dollar General, shows an example using one-third, two-
thirds, and 50 percent retracements. In this instance, the decline from A to 
ąÆ is 100 percent of the move. If we want to establish possible resistance 
points for subsequent rebounds, then the intelligent places to monitor are 
these one-third, two-thirds, and 50 percent retracements. As you can see, 
the rally ending at ąĪ represents a 50 percent retracement and that ending 
at D a 66 percent or two-thirds retracement. 
Many technicians use a sequence of numbers discovered by Leonardo 
Fibonacci, a thirteenth-century Italian mathematician. The sequence has 
many properties, but a key one is that each new number is the sum of the 
two previous numbers in the series. Thus 5 and 8 = 13, 8 and 13 = 21, and 
so on. The significance of this sequence for our purposes is that it offers 
--- PAGE 20 ---
30 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Chart 3-5 Dollar General, 1999-2000, daily. 
some guidelines for proportionate moves. For example, each number in the 
sequence is 61.8 percent of the next number, 38.2 percent of the number 
after that, and so forth. 
In this respect, Charts 3-6 and 3-7, for Palladium, show some possibilities. 
In the case of Chart 3-6, the huge 1997-1998 rally represents 100 percent of 
Chart 3-6 Palladium, 1997-2000, daily. 
Support and Resistance Zones: How to Identify Them 31 
Chart 3-7 Palladium, 1996-2000, daily. 
the move. ąÆąĪ and BD, which turned out to be support levels, were really 61.8 
percent and 50 percent retracements, respectively. Note how the 61.8 per┬Ł
cent level became support for an extended period in 1998. Also, the 23.6 per┬Ł
cent (one Fibonacci number divided by two later ones in the series) level was 
pivotal in 1998 and 1999, as reflected by the thick black line beginning at E. 
Finally, Chart 3-7 shows the same principle applied to upside projections. 
Once again, AB represents 100 percent of the decline and lines are drawn 
at upside Fibonacci proportions. In this case, the next higher number 
divided by the current number is 1.61, then 2.61, and so on. It is self-evi┬Ł
dent how the 161.8 percent and 261.8 percent proportions become key piv┬Ł
otal points in future price action. Once again, these levels are not 
guaranteed to become important pivotal points but are intelligent places 
on the chart to anticipate that possibility. 
Rules for Determining the 
Probable Significance of a 
Potential Support or Resistance 
Zone 
At this point you are probably asking, "How do I know how important each 
support and resistance level is likely to be?" Unfortunately, there is no hard 
and fast answer, but there are some general rules that can act as guidelines. 
--- PAGE 21 ---
32 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
1. The Amount of a Security That Changed Hands in a Specific 
AreaŌĆöthe Greater the Activity, the More Significant the Zone 
This is fairly self-evident, for whenever you have a large number of people 
buying or selling at a particular price, they have a tendency to remember 
their own experiences. Buyers, as we have already established, like to break 
even. Sellers, on the other hand, may have bought lower down and recall 
that prices previously stalled at the resistance level. Their motivation for 
profit taking becomes that much greater. 
2. The Greater the Speed and Extent of the Previous Move, the 
More Significant a Support or Resistance Zone Is Likely to Be 
The attempt to climb through the resistance level here can be compared to 
the efforts of a person who tries to crash through a door. If he attacks the 
door from, say, 10 or 12 feet away, he can propel himself with lots of momen┬Ł
tum, and the door will probably give way. On the other hand, if he begins 
his attempt from 100 feet away, he will arrive at the door with less velocity 
and will probably fail in his attempt. In both cases the door represented the 
exact same resistance, but it was the resistance relative to the velocity of the 
person that was important. The same principle can be applied to the mar┬Ł
ket, in that a long, steep climb in price is similar to the 100-foot run, and the 
resistance level resembles the door. Consequently, the more overextended 
the previous price swing, the less the resistance or support that is required 
to halt it. 
In this respect, Chart 3-8, for the Bank Commerciale Index (an Italian 
stock average), falls to a low in August and then rallies. However, the sub┬Ł
sequent decline is extremely steep, so by the time the index reaches the sup┬Ł
port level at around 880, it is completely exhausted and sellers are unable 
to push prices below this level. 
Chart 3-9 features the gold price. Note how it makes a high in January 
1986 and then falls away. The subsequent rally is quite steep, then the price 
runs out of steam and declines again. Finally, in late July, it works its way 
higher in a fairly methodical manner. This time the same level of resistance 
is easily overcome because buyers are not as exhausted as they were in their 
March attempt. 
3. Examine the Amount of Time Elapsed 
The third rule for establishing the potency of a support or resistance zone 
is to examine the amount of time that has elapsed between the formation 
Support and Resistance Zones: How to Identify Them 33 
Chart 3-8 Bank Commerciale, daily. 
--- PAGE 22 ---
34 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
of the original congestion and the nature of general market developments 
during that period. A supply that is 6 months old has greater potency than 
one established 10 or 20 years previously. Even so, it is almost uncanny how 
support and resistance levels remain effective time and time again, even 
when separated by many years. 
Summary 
ŌĆó Support and resistance represent a concentration of demand and supply 
sufficient to halt a price move at least temporarily. 
ŌĆó They are not signals to buy or sell but rather are intelligent places for 
anticipating a reversal. They should always be used in conjunction with 
other indicators. 
ŌĆó Potential support/resistance zones develop at previous highs and lows, 
round numbers, trendlines and MA's, emotional points on charts, and 
retracement points such as Fibonacci proportions. 
ŌĆó The significance of a support or resistance zone depends upon the 
amount of an asset that previously changed hands in that area, the speed 
and extent of the previous price move, and the period of time that has 
elapsed since the zone was last encountered. 
4 Trendlines 
Trendlines are perhaps the simplest of the tools in our technical arsenal and 
are arguably one of the most effective. Since the construction of nearly all price 
patterns requires the use of trendlines, this concept is a fundamental building block 
of pattern identification and interpretation. In this chapter we will describe the 
characteristics of trendlines and explain how the significance of individual 
lines can be determined. 
A trendline is a straight line connecting a series of ascending bottoms in 
a rising market or the tops of a descending series of rally peaks. Those trend-
lines joining the lows are called up trendlines and those connecting the tops 
are referred to as down trendlines. Typically a down trendline is constructed 
by joining the final peak with the top of the first rally, as in Fig. 4-1. When 
the price breaks above the trendline, a trend change signal is given. The 
opposite is true for an up trendline (see Fig. 4-4). 
How Should Trendlines Be 
Drawn? 
In order to be a true trendline, a line must connect two or more peaks or 
troughs. Otherwise it will be drawn in space and will have no significance. 
You will often see people constructing lines that touch only one point, as 
in Fig. 4-2, or even no points at all, as in Fig. 4-3. Such lines have no mean┬Ł
ing whatsoever, and are really worse than drawing nothing at all. This is 
because by simply appearing on the charts, such lines give the observer the 
impression that they actually have some significance. This is a fundamen┬Ł
tally important point because a true trendline is a graphic way of representing 
the underlying trend. Consequently, if a line touches only one point, it can┬Ł
not be a true trendline. 
35 
--- PAGE 23 ---
36 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 4-1 Down trendline. 
Ideally, an up trendline is constructed by connecting the final low with the 
first bottom following the initial rally, as is done by line AD in Fig. 4-4. This 
is called the primary trendline. In the case of a primary trend, this would be 
the bear market low and the first intermediate bottom. The example shown 
here offers a fairly shallow angle of ascent. Unfortunately, the price rallies 
sharply, which means that the violation develops well after the final peak. 
Figure 4-2 Trendline connected once. 
Trendlines 37 
Figure 4-3 Trendline not connected. 
In such situations it is better to redraw the line as the price moves up. In 
Fig. 4-4 this new line is line ąÆąĪ, which is obviously a better reflection of the 
underlying trend. This is called a secondary trendline. Down trendlines are 
constructed using the same principles, but in reverse. 
Since trends can be sideways, it follows that trendlines can also be drawn 
horizontally. This is often the case when we construct price patterns such 
Figure 4-4 Primary and secondary up trendlines. 
--- PAGE 24 ---
38 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
as the neckline of a horizontal head-and-shoulders (H&S) pattern or the 
upper or lower boundaries of rectangles (described in later chapters). In 
the case of price patterns, the penetration of these lines usually warns of a 
change in trend, as does the violation of rising or falling trendlines. 
It's important to understand at this point that drawing trendlines is more 
a matter of common sense than of following a set of hard and fast rules. 
Bar versus Line or Close-Only 
Charts 
Some charts are plotted with bars and others are line charts. The question 
naturally arises, "Which form should be used for the purposes of trendline 
analysis?" In most cases, bar charts offer more timely signals, whether the 
signal is a peak-and-trough progression, price pattern completion, or trend-
line violation. In technical analysis, timeliness comes at a price, and the price 
in this case is more whipsaws. With traditional daily or weekly charts, the 
closing price is very important because it sorts out the men (i.e., those who 
are willing to take home a position overnight or over a weekend) from the 
boys (i.e., those who are not). This has become a less important factor in 
some markets, as they trade for 24 hours Sunday through Friday. (However, 
since all markets are closed over the weekend, Friday closes continue to 
maintain their importance.) Even so, closing prices are, for the most part, more 
important chart points than highs or lows. Also, since there is much excitement 
during the day as unexpected news breaks, highs and lows often represent 
random points on the chart. For this reason, it is often a better idea to con┬Ł
struct trendlines using closing data. I am not going to say that this is always 
the case because some bar trendlines have greater significance than close-
only ones, based on the rules for significance described later in this chap┬Ł
ter. Thus, it is always crucial to apply common sense as much as strict 
technical rules. The question you should be constantly asking is, "Which line 
better reflects the underlying trend?" 
Trendline Breaks Can Signal 
Reversals or Consolidation 
The completion of a price pattern can signify either (1) a reversal in the 
previous trend, which is known as a reversal pattern, or (2) a resumption of 
the previous trend, which is called a consolidation or continuation pattern. 
Similarly, the penetration of a trendline will result in either a reversal of that 
trend or its continuation. Figure 4-5 illustrates this from the perspective of 
Trendlines 39 
Figure 4-5 Reversal up trendline break. 
a rising price trend. In this case, the trendline joining the series of troughs 
is eventually penetrated on the downside. The fourth peak represented the 
highest point in the bull trend, so the downward violation of the trendline 
signals that a bear move is under way. 
The upward price trend and trendline penetration in Fig. 4-6 are identi┬Ł
cal to those in Fig. 4-5, but the action following this warning signal is entirely 
Figure 4-6 Consolidation up trendline break. 
--- PAGE 25 ---
40 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 4-7 Consolidation turns into a reversal break. 
different. This is because the trendline violation results in the advance con┬Ł
tinuing, but at a greatly reduced pace. The third alternative is that the price 
consolidates in a sideways trading range prior to reversing. This is shown in 
Fig. 4-7. Thus, whenever a trendline is violated, the odds strongly favor a 
change in trend. That change can be either an actual reversal or a (sideways) 
trading range following an up- or downtrend. 
In most instances, there is, unfortunately, no way of telling at the time of 
the violation which possibility will prove to be the outcome. One clue may 
be provided by the trendline's angle of ascent or descent. Since sharp-angled 
trendlines are less sustainable, their penetration has a tendency to be fol┬Ł
lowed by a consolidation rather than a reversal. 
Valuable clues can be gleaned by evaluating the state of health of the mar┬Ł
ket's overall technical structure. Also, a trendline penetration may occur at 
the time of, or just before, the successful completion of a reversal price pat┬Ł
tern. 
If a series of ascending peaks and troughs is accompanied by progressively 
lower volume, this is a sign that the advance is running out of steam (since 
volume is no longer going with the trend). In this situation, a trendline vio┬Ł
lation is likely to be of greater significance than if volume had continued 
to expand with each successive rally. It is not necessary for a downside pen┬Ł
etration to be accompanied by high volume, but a violation that occurs as 
activity expands emphasizes the bearish undertone because of the obvious 
switch in the demand/supply balance in favor of sellers. 
Trendlines 41 
Extended Trendlines 
Most people observe the violation of a trendline, assume that the trend has 
changed, and eventually forget about the line. This is a mistake, because an 
extended line can become just as important as the violated line itself. 
If an up trendline is violated, for instance, the price often returns to the 
extended line. This is known as a throwback move. Figure 4-8 shows a trend-
line reversing its previous role as support when the throwback move turns 
it into an area of resistance. Figure 4-9 shows the same situation for a declin┬Ł
ing market. 
Chart 4-1, for instance, shows an up trendline break for the U.S. govern┬Ł
ment 20-year bond yield. The penetration of this relatively steep line was 
followed by a small decline. However, the cyclical rally peak in 1984 was 
turned back by the extended line, which reversed its role and proved to be 
strong resistance. Chart 4-2 shows the same idea, but for a down trendline 
for the Eurodollar yield. In this instance it was violated in 1987. Later the 
extended line proved to be support for the 1993 decline. 
Logarithmic (Ratio) versus 
Arithmetic Scales 
The importance of plotting charts on a logarithmic as opposed to an arithmetic 
scale was discussed in Chapter 2. The choice of scale is even more critical for 
a timely and accurate use of trendline analysis. This is because prices tend to 
F'Sure 4-8 Extended up trendline becomes resistance. 
--- PAGE 26 ---
42 Part 1: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 
accelerate in the direction of the prevailing trend at the end of a major move┬Ł
ment; i.e., they rise faster at the end of a rising trend and decline more sharply 
at the termination of a bear market. In a bull market, prices rise slowly after 
an initial burst, then advance at a steeper and steeper angle as they approach 
Chart 4-1 U.S. government 20-year bond yield, 1975-1986, weekly. 
Trendlines 43 
Chart 4-2 Cash Eurodollars, 1980-1994, weekly. 
the ultimate peak, looking rather like the left-hand cross section of a moun┬Ł
tain. 
Chart 4-3 shows an up trendline break for Intel based on a logarithmic scale. 
Note that the downside penetration develops in mid-December. Chart 4-4 
shows exactly the same period, but this time the scaling is arithmetic. The 
Chart 4-3 Intel, 2001-2002, daily (logarithmic). 
--- PAGE 27 ---
44 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Chart 4-4 Intel, 2001-2002, daily (arithmetic). 
trendline break is entirely different, since it initially comes as a whipsaw in 
late December, followed by a valid break in mid-January. The downward-
pointing arrow on the left marked the logarithmic break. Thus it is appar┬Ł
ent that up trendlines are violated more quickly on a logarithmic than on 
an arithmetic scale. 
Chart 4-5 IBM, 2001-2002, daily (arithmetic). 
Trendlines 45 
Chart 4-6 IBM, 2001-2002, daily (logarithmic). 
Conversely, down trendlines are violated sooner on an arithmetic scale. 
This can be seen from a comparison of Charts 4-5 and 4-6, for IBM. 
Generally speaking, penetration of a logarithmically drawn trendline is 
more accurate in reflecting trend reversals than is penetration of an arith┬Ł
metically drawn trendline, although in both these examples the final pene┬Ł
trations came at more advantageous prices for the arithmetically scaled chart. 
Significance of Trendlines 
It has been established that a break in trend caused by penetration of a 
trendline results in either an actual trend reversal or a slowing in the pace 
of the trend. Although it may not always be possible to determine which of 
these alternatives will develop, it is still important to understand the signif┬Ł
icance of a trendline penetration; the guidelines described next should help 
m this evaluation. Essentially, this evaluation depends on three factors: the 
length of the line, the number of times it has been touched, and the angle 
of ascent or descent. Let's consider each of them in turn. 
1. Length of the Line 
A trendline measures a trend, so the longer the line, the longer the trend it 
is monitoring and the more significant the trendline. If a series of ascending 
--- PAGE 28 ---
46 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
bottoms occurs over a three- to four-week span, the resulting trendline is only 
of minor importance. If the trend extends over a period of one to three years, 
however, its violation marks a significant juncture point. Just remember, big 
trends result in big signals, small trends in small ones. 
2. Number of Times the Trendline Has Been Touched 
or Approached 
A trendline derives its authority from the number of times it has been 
touched or approached; i.e., the larger the number, the greater the trend-
line's significance. This is because a trendline represents a dynamic area of 
support or resistance. Each successive test of the line contributes to the 
importance of this support or resistance role, and thus the authority of the 
line is a true reflection of the underlying trend. Just remember that a move 
close to the line (an approach) is almost as important as an actual touch┬Ł
ing because it reflects the line's importance as a support or resistance area. 
Also, if a line gains significance from the fact that it has been touched or 
approached on numerous occasions, the extended line will become equally 
as important, but from a reverse point of view. This is because extended lines 
reverse their support/resistance role. For example, if a good up trendline 
has been violated, the price is now below it. Any rally will therefore find resis┬Ł
tance at this line, which had, of course, previously been support. 
3. Angle of Ascent or Descent 
A very sharp trend, as shown by the dashed line (AB) in Fig. 4-10, is diffi┬Ł
cult to sustain and is liable to be broken rather easily, even by a short side┬Ł
ways movement. It is then necessary to draw a line with a smaller angle of 
ascent or descent (AC). 
All trends are eventually violated, but the steeper ones are likely to be rup┬Ł
tured more quickly. The violation of a particularly steep trend is not as signif┬Ł
icant as the violation of a more gradual one. Penetration of a steep line usually 
results in a short corrective movement, following which the trend resumes, but 
at a greatly reduced and more sustainable pace. Usually, the penetration of a 
steep trendline represents a continuation rather than a reversal break. 
Measuring Implications 
Trendlines have measuring implications when they are broken. The mea┬Ł
surement is the maximum vertical distance between the price and the 
Trendlines 
Figure 4-10 Steep angles of ascent. 
trendline. An example for a rising trend is shown in Fig. 4-11. This distance 
is then projected in the direction of the new trend from the point of pen┬Ł
etration. 
The term price objective is perhaps misleading. Objectives are usually 
reached when a trendline violation turns out to be a reversal, but because 
they are more often exceeded (as we shall learn with price patterns), the 
Figure 4-11 Down trendline violation measuring objective. 
--- PAGE 29 ---
48 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 4-12 Up trendline violation measuring objective. 
objective becomes more of a minimum expectation. An objective for a down┬Ł
side reversal is illustrated in Fig. 4-12. 
Trend Channels 
So far only the possibilities of drawing trendlines joining bottoms in rising 
markets and top's in declining ones have been examined. It is also useful to 
draw lines that are parallel to those basic trendlines, as shown m Fig. ┬½3. In 
Figure 4-13 Up trend channel. 
Trendlines 49 
Figure 4-14 Down trend channel. 
a rising market, the parallel line known as a return trendline joins the tops of 
rallies, and during declines the return line joins the series of bottoms (see 
Fig. 4-14). The area between these trend extremities is known as a trend chan┬Ł
nel. 
The return line is useful from two points of view. First, it represents an 
area of support or resistance, depending on the direction of the trend. 
Second, and perhaps more important, penetration of the return trendline 
represents a signal that either the trend will accelerate or a reversal in the 
basic trend of at least a temporary proportion is about to take place. 
In Fig. 4-15, the violation of the return line signifies that the price advance 
has begun to accelerate. In effect, the channel in Fig. 4-15 represents a rising 
trading range, and the trendline violation is a breakout from it. 
Exhaustion 
On the other hand, if the angle of the trend channel is much steeper, as in 
Figs. 4-16 and 4-17, the violation of the return line represents an exhaus┬Ł
tion move. The failure of the price to hold above (below) the return line 
then signals an important reversal in trend. This is often the case if the break 
through the return line is accompanied by high volume. 
Consider a situation in which a person is sawing a thick piece of wood. 
At first the sawing strokes are slow but deliberate, but gradually the person 
realizes that this task is going to take some time, becomes frustrated, and 
slowly increases the speed of the strokes. Finally the person bursts into a 
--- PAGE 30 ---
50 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 4-15 Up trend channel breakout. 
frantic effort and is forced to give up the task at least temporarily because 
of complete exhaustion. The same principles hold true in a declining mar┬Ł
ke. In this case, the expanding volume at the low represents a selling cli┬Ł
max As a general rule the steeper the channel, the more likely it is that 
the breakout will turn out to be an exhaustion move. 
Figure 4 Exhaustion break 
16 Down trend channel exhaustion break. 
Trendlines 
Figure 4-17 Up trend channel exhaustion break. 
Exhaustion also develops when a price rallies temporarily above a regu┬Ł
lar down trendline (or below an up trendline), then breaks back below 
(above) it. In the case of a down trendline, the situation is akin to someone 
jumping up and temporarily pushing through the ceiling. He is able to pull 
his head through to the next floor for a few moments, but he then falls 
sharply back to the floor below. At this point he has used up all his spare 
energy in the attempt to move to the next floor and is totally exhausted. 
Before he can make another attempt he will need some time to gain some 
new energy. The same is true of the price, which makes an effort to rally 
above the trendline but is unable to maintain the breakout. 
This temporary break often indicates that the prevailing trend has much 
further to run. It also raises a dilemma concerning the way in which a trend-
line should be constructed. In Fig. 4-18, for instance, we see a false break 
above trendline AB. Should AB now be abandoned, or should the peak of 
the exhaustion break be connected to the rally high to form a new (dashed 
AC) trendline? Again, it's a matter of common sense. On the one hand, the 
top of the whipsaw break is technically the correct place to draw the line, 
but common sense suggests that the original line is a better reflection of 
the underlying trend. After all, at the time of the whipsaw, it had been 
touched three times. If a new line is then drawn to reflect the break, that 
line will have been touched only twice, once at the outset and once at the 
whipsaw peak. In a sense, the whipsaw is adding further credibility to the 
initial line because the price was unable to hold above it. If we had come 
upon this situation after the whipsaw break and tried to construct a line, it 
--- PAGE 31 ---
52 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 4-18 Down trendline construction. 
would have been even more obvious that line AB was far superior to line 
AC because it has been touched or approached on far more occasions. 
The same principles are true in reverse for an up trendline. When you 
think about it, a whipsaw break actually adds credibility to the trendline. This is 
because the price is able to violate the line, but this line is so significant as 
Chart 4-7 Microsoft, 1998-1999, daily. 
Trendlines 
53 
a support/resistance area that the price is unable to hold the break. If it 
were not such a significant barrier, the break would have held and the whip-
saw would have been avoided. Consequently, when the price is able to expe┬Ł
rience a valid break, the signal is that much stronger. 
Chart 4-7 shows an example of a whipsaw downside break for Microsoft in 1998. 
Summary 
ŌĆó Trendlines are an easy tool to understand, but they should be used with 
a strong dose of common sense. Considerable experimentation and prac┬Ł
tice are required before the art of interpreting them can be successfully 
mastered. 
ŌĆó Trendline violations signal either a temporary interruption or a reversal 
in the prevailing trend. It is necessary to refer to other pieces of techni┬Ł
cal evidence to determine which is being signaled. 
ŌĆó The significance of trendlines is a function of their length, the number 
of times they have been touched or approached, and the steepness of the 
angle of ascent or descent. 
ŌĆó A good trendline reflects the underlying trend and represents an impor┬Ł
tant support and resistance zone. 
ŌĆó Extended trendlines reverse the former support/resistance role and 
should not be overlooked. 
ŌĆó Exhaustion breaks are usually followed by sharp moves in the opposite 
direction to the break. Exhaustion breaks enhance the significance of a 
trendline. 
--- PAGE 32 ---
5 Volume Principles 
as They Apply to 
Price Patterns 
Almost everything that technicians use in plotting a specific security involves 
either the price itself or a statistical variation on it. Volume can offer a new 
dynamic in our interpretation of crowd psychology. Therefore, analyzing vol┬Ł
ume trends gives us a better understanding of how and why price patterns 
work. In effect, the study of the characteristics of volume gives greater depth 
to the weight-of-the-evidence approach described earlier. Volume not only 
measures the enthusiasm of buyers and sellers but is a variable that is totally 
independent of price. In this chapter we will discuss some general princi┬Ł
ples of volume interpretation. However, this is not the final word, because 
I will have more to say on this subject as we expand the discussion to include 
individual price patterns. 
Benefits of Volume Studies 
Volume studies offer three major benefits. 
1. When price and volume patterns are compared, it is important to see 
whether they are in agreement. If they are, the probabilities favor an 
extension of the trend. 
2. If price and volume disagree, this tells us that the underlying trend is not 
as strong as it looks on the surface. If a breakout from a price pattern 
develops with such a disagreement, a warning of a potentially invalid sig┬Ł
nal is being given. 
Volume Principles as They Apply to Price Patterns 55 
3. Occasionally, price action offers mild signs of an impending trend rever┬Ł
sal, but volume can throw up characteristics of its own that literally shout 
this message. In such cases, a study that was limited to price action would 
fail to uncover a really good and obvious warning or opportunity. 
Principles of Volume 
Interpretation 
1. The first and most important principle is that volume typically goes with 
the trend. It is normal for activity to expand in a rising market and to con┬Ł
tract in a declining one (see Fig. 5-1). In this sense, volume is always 
interpreted in relation to the recent past. Comparing twenty-first-cen┬Ł
tury 1 billion-plus share days on the NYSE with early-twentieth-century 
levels of 5 or 6 million is of little help. Such a comparison reflects insti┬Ł
tutional, not psychological, changes. Volume is higher today because of 
more companies being listed, the advent of derivatives, lower commis┬Ł
sions, and so forth. On the other hand, a 3 billion share day this week 
compared to a recent 1.5 billion share day last month is relevant, 
because it shows a significant change in activity over a period in which 
institutional changes will be nonexistent. 
We know that when prices move in trends, this does not occur in a 
straight line. Instead, the price works its way up and down in a zigzag 
Figure 5-1 Volume goes with the trend. 
--- PAGE 33 ---
56 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 5-2 Volume moves in trends. 
fashion. Volume trends are similar. On the left side of Fig. 5-2, for instance, 
the arrows indicate an expanding volume trend. It is apparent that the 
level of activity does not expand in every period. There are quiet periods 
and active ones, but the general thrust is up. The right-hand part of the 
figure features a down trend in volume. It too is irregular. When we talk 
about volume rising or falling, we are usually referring to its trend. It is 
normal for such trends to be interrupted by aberrations in volume levels. 
Volume trends, like price trends, can be intraday, short, intermediate, or 
long, depending on the nature of the chart. 
2. The amount of money flowing into a security must always equal the 
amount of money flowing out. This is true regardless of the level of 
volume. 
Consequently, it is the level of enthusiasm of buyers or sellers that deter┬Ł
mines the course of prices. 
If buyers are bullish, they will raise their bids until their demands are sat┬Ł
isfied. If sellers react to bad news, they may panic, pushing prices down 
sharply, but at all times the amount of a security being sold is equal to that 
being purchased. 
3. The combination of rising volume and rising price is normal. It indi┬Ł
cates that things are in gear. Such a state of affairs has no forecasting 
value, except to imply that it is likely that a negative divergence between 
price and volume lies ahead. 
4. Volume normally leads price during a bull move. A new high in price that 
is not confirmed by volume should be regarded as a red flag, warning 
Volume Principles as They Apply to Price Patterns 57 
Figure 5-3 Volume leads price in uptrends. 
that the prevailing trend may be about to reverse. In Fig. 5-3, the price 
peaks at point C, yet the average volume reached its maximum around 
point A. Such action is normal; the declining volume peaks warn of 
underlying technical weakness. Unfortunately, there are no hard and 
fast rules about how many divergences precede a peak. Generally speak┬Ł
ing, though, the greater the number of negative divergences, the 
weaker the underlying technical picture. Also, the lower the peaks rel┬Ł
ative to each other, the less enthusiasm is being generated, and the more 
vulnerable the technical position becomes, once buying dries up or sell┬Ł
ing enthusiasm intensifies. A new high that is accompanied by virtually 
no volume is just as bearish as a new price high with virtually no upside 
momentum. 
An example is shown in Chart 5-1, for the Mexico Fund, where you 
can see that the volume clusters gradually become smaller as the price 
rallies. Eventually this negative technical characteristic is confirmed as 
the price violates the March/May up trendline. 
Rising prices accompanied by a trend of falling volume (Fig. 5-4) is an 
abnormal situation. It indicates a weak and suspect rally and is a bear 
market characteristic. When it is recognized, it can and should be used 
as a piece of evidence pointing to a primary bear market environment. 
Volume measures the relative enthusiasm of buyers and sellers. When 
volume shrinks as prices rise, the advance occurs because of a lack of 
selling rather than because of sponsorship from buyers. Sooner or later 
the trend will reach a point where sellers become more motivated. After 
--- PAGE 34 ---
58 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Chart 5-1 Mexico Fund. 1995-1996, daily. 
that, prices will start to pick up on the downside. One clue is provided 
when volume increases noticeably as the price starts to decline. This is 
shown in Fig. 5-5, where you can see that volume starts to pick up as the 
price starts a sell-off. In such situations, it is not necessary for volume 
to expand throughout the decline, as it does in this example. It could 
Figure 5-4 Rising price and falling volume are bearish. 
Volume Principles as They Apply to Price Patterns 59 
Figure 5-5 Falling price and rising volume are bearish. 
be that it picks up for two or three bars just after the peak. In fact, this 
would be a more typical situation. 
Figure 5-6 shows how the volume configurations change between a 
bull market and a bear market. Chart 5-2, for Coors, shows the final rally 
being accompanied by a trend of declining volume. When the lower 
trendline is violated, volume picks up noticeably. In this instance, we 
Figure 5-6 Volume characteristics change in bull and bear markets. 
--- PAGE 35 ---
60 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Chart 5-2 Coors, 2000-2001, daily. 
have one bearish volume configuration that is instantly followed by 
another. Chart 5-3, for Radio Shack, shows several bear market rallies 
in which the rising price trend is accompanied by declining volume. 
6. Sometimes both price and volume expand slowly, gradually working into 
an exponential rise with a final blow-offstage. Following this development, 
Chart 5-3 Radio Shack, 2000-2001, daily. 
Volume Principles as They Apply to Price Patterns 61 
Figure 5-7 Volume and a parabolic blow-off. 
both volume and price fall off equally sharply. This represents an exhaus┬Ł
tion move and is characteristic of a trend reversal, especially when it is 
supported by a one- or two-bar price pattern (discussed in subsequent 
chapters). The significance of the reversal will depend upon the extent 
of the previous advance and the degree of volume expansion. Obviously 
an exhaustion move that takes four to six days to develop will be nowhere 
near as significant as one that develops over a matter of weeks. This phe┬Ł
nomenon is termed a parabolic blow-off and is featured in Fig. 5-7. 
Unfortunately, exhaustion, or blow-off, moves such as this are not easy to 
define in the sense that it is possible to construct clearly definable trend-
lines or price patterns. For this reason, it is usually not possible to spot 
the terminal phase until a period or so after volume and price have 
reached their crescendos. 
Newmont Mining, in Chart 5-4, offers a classic example of an expo┬Ł
nential increase in both price and volume that ends in tears in the form 
of an abrupt reversal in late September 1987. 
A selling climax is the opposite of a parabolic blow-off. It occurs when 
prices fall for a considerable time at an accelerating pace, accompanied 
by expanding volume. Prices typically rise after a selling climax. The low 
that is established at the time of the climax is unlikely to be violated for 
a considerable time. A price rise from a selling climax is by definition 
accompanied by declining volume. This is the only time when con┬Ł
tracting volume and a rising price may be regarded as normal. Even so, 
it is important to make sure that volume expands on subsequent rallies, 
as indicated in Fig. 5-8. The termination of a bear trend is often, but 
--- PAGE 36 ---
62 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Chart 5-4 Newmont Mining, 1986-1987, daily. 
not always, accompanied by a selling climax. Having said that, it is 
important to note that in many instances the selling climax, after a rally, 
is followed by new lows. 
In Chart 5-5, for Dresser Industries, we see a selling climax develop in 
the late summer. This is then followed by a rally, but in this instance the 
Figure 5-8 A selling climax. 
Volume Principles as They Apply to Price Patterns 63 
Chart 5-5 Dresser Industries, 1994-1995, daily. 
climax is not the final bottom. At the peak of the rally, rising prices are 
accompanied by declining volume, a typical bear market characteristic. 
8. When prices advance following a long decline and then react to a level 
at, slightly above, or marginally below the previous trough, this is a bull┬Ł
ish sign if the volume on the second trough is significantly lower than 
the volume on the first. There is an old saying on Wall Street, "Never 
short a dull market." This saying applies very much to this type of situa┬Ł
tion, in which a previous low is being tested with very low volume. Such 
a situation indicates a complete lack of selling pressure (see Fig. 5-9). 
9. A downside breakout from a price pattern, trendline, or moving average 
(MA) that occurs on heavy volume is abnormal and is a bearish sign that 
confirms the reversal in trend (Fig. 5-10). When prices decline, it is usu┬Ł
ally because of a lack of bids, so volume contracts. This is normal activity 
and does not give us much information. However, when volume expands 
on the downside, it is because sellers are more motivated, so the decline, 
other things being equal, is likely to be more severe. 
10. When the price has been rising for many months, an anemic rally 
(Fig. 5-11) accompanied by high volume indicates churning action and 
is a bearish factor. 
11. Following a decline, heavy volume with little price change is indicative 
of accumulation and is normally a bullish factor (Fig. 5-12). 
--- PAGE 37 ---
64 Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 5-9 Look for low volume when testing lows. 
12. Record volume coming off a major low is usually a very reliable signal 
that a significant bottom has been seen. This is because it indicates that 
an underlying change in psychology has taken place. Such reversals in 
sentiment are usually of a primary trend magnitude. Examples in the 
U.S. stock market developed in March 1978, August 1982 and 1984, and 
October 1998. A similar pattern also developed at the 1987 low in bonds 
and eurodollars. This is not an infallible indicator, though, because 
record volume was achieved in January 2001 for both the NYSE and 
Nasdaq, yet this did not turn out to be the final low for the move. 
Figure 5-10 Rising volume on a downside breakout is bearish. 
Volume Principles as They Apply to Price Patterns 65 
Figure 5-11 Churning is bearish. 
13. When volume and price expand at a sharp pace, but short of a para┬Ł
bolic blow-off, and then contract slightly, this usually indicates a change 
in trend. Sometimes this is an actual reversal and at other times a con┬Ł
solidation. This phenomenon is featured in Fig. 5-13 and represents a 
temporary exhaustion of buying power. It is associated with several one-
and two-bar price patterns discussed in later chapters. 
14. When the price experiences a small rounding top and volume a round┬Ł
ing bottom, this is a doubly abnormal situation, since price is rising and 
Figure 5-12 Accumulation is bullish 
--- PAGE 38 ---
66 
Part I: Basic Building Blocks 
Figure 5-13 High volume after a rally indicates exhaustion. 
volume falling as the peak is reached. After the peak, volume expands 
as the price declines, which is also abnormal and bearish. An example 
is shown in Fig. 5-14. An example featuring Microsoft is featured in 
Chart 5-6. Note how the letter n characterizes the price action, whereas 
the volume configuration is closer to a rounded letter V. 
None of the indicators in the technical arsenal is guaranteed to work 
every time. This is certainly true of volume characteristics. However, when 
volume is used in combination with price characteristics in pattern 
Figure 5-14 Watch volume on rallies and reactions. 
Volume Principles as They Apply to Price Patterns 67 
Chart 5-6 Microsoft, daily. 
interpretation, it greatly enhances the probability that a specific forma┬Ł
tion will work. As we discuss specific formations, the basic volume prin┬Ł
ciples described here will be expanded to suit individual cases. 
Summary 
ŌĆó Volume is a totally independent variable from price. 
ŌĆó It is normal for volume to go with the trend. When these characteristics 
are present, they have little forecasting value. 
ŌĆó When volume trends are moving in a direction opposite to that of price, 
this is abnormal and either warns of an impending trend reversal or 
emphasizes the significance of any breakout. 
ŌĆó Volume trends experience exhaustion phenomena. These are called par┬Ł
abolic blow-offs at tops and selling climaxes at lows. 
--- PAGE 39 ---
PART II 
Traditional 
Patterns 
--- PAGE 40 ---
6 Using Rectangles, 
a Case Study for 
All Patterns 
This chapter will explain the basic principles of price pattern interpretation 
that apply to most formations by using one formation as an example. It will 
then be possible to expand the discussion to include other patterns in sub┬Ł
sequent chapters. Our chosen vehicle is the rectangle, so let's take a closer 
look at it. 
Basic Concepts 
Price trends do not usually reverse on a dime. Instead, the up- and down-
or down- and uptrends are typically separated by a transitional period or 
trading range, where buyers and sellers are equally matched. 
The two possibilities are shown in Figs. 6-1 and 6-2. Figure 6-1 represents 
a typical cycle consisting of three trends: up, sideways, and down. Then two 
more trends develop as the price experiences another horizontal trading 
range, followed by a renewed uptrend. Figure 6-2 shows a highly emotional 
market that changes without warning. This is by far the exception, since 
most trends are separated by some form of trading range. An oil tanker takes 
a long time to slow down and then go into reverse. The same is normally 
true of financial markets. Generally speaking, the longer the trend, the more 
time spent in the reversal (turnaround) process. 
This transitional or horizontal phase has great significance because it is 
the demarcation between a rising and a falling trend (or vice versa). If 
prices have been advancing, the enthusiasm of the buyers has outweighed 
71 
--- PAGE 41 ---
72 Part.II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-1 Top and bottom reversals. 
the pessimism of the sellers up to this point, and buyers have optimistically 
bid prices higher. During the transition phase, the battle between optimism 
and pessimism becomes more or less even, until finally, for one reason or 
another, it is tipped in a new direction as the relative weight of selling 
pushes the trend (of prices) down. It is the breaking to post-transitional 
new low ground that alerts the trader to the fact that a reversal in trend 
has taken place. In other words, when prices fall below the trading range, 
a sell signal is given. At the termination of a bear trend, the reverse process 
occurs. 
Over the years, technicians have noted that such ranging action at both 
tops and bottoms has taken the form of clearly definable price patterns or 
price formations. 
The Transitional Turning Point 
Figure 6-3 shows the price action at the end of a long rising trend. As soon 
as the price rises above line B, it is in the transitional area, although this is 
apparent only after prices have begun to fluctuate sideways. 
Figure 6-2 Reversal on a dime. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 73 
Figure 6-3 Trading range reversal. 
Once the price is in this trading zone, it rises to line A, which is a resis┬Ł
tance area. The resistance is not initially identifiable, but after the price has 
backed off from the initial high, it is evident that the price level at A rep┬Ł
resents a previous high. This makes it a potential candidate for a resistance 
point. When the next rally also fails at A, it is possible to construct a hori┬Ł
zontal trendline. The same thing can be done at B when the subsequent 
reaction finds support at that level for a second time. The demand/supply 
relationship comes into balance in favor of the sellers whenever the price 
reaches A. This temporary reversal may occur because buyers refuse to pay 
up for a security, because the higher price attracts more sellers, or for a com┬Ł
bination of both reasons. 
Just as the price level at A reverses the balance in favor of the sellers, so 
does the support level B alter it once again. This time, the trend moves in 
an upward direction, for at B, prices become relatively attractive to buyers 
who missed the boat on the way up. Also, sellers who feel that the price will 
again reach A hold off. For a while, there is a standoff between the two par┬Ł
ties within the confines of the area bounded by lines A and B. Finally, the 
price falls below B, and a new (downward) trend is signaled. 
The contest between buyers and sellers is like a battle fought by two armies 
engaged in trench warfare. In Fig. 6-4, example A, armies A and B are fac┬Ł
ing off. Line AA represents army A's trench line of defense, and BB is army 
B's. The arrows indicate the forays between the two lines as both armies fight 
their way to the opposing trench, but are unable to penetrate the line of 
defense. In example B, army B finally pushes through army A's line of 
--- PAGE 42 ---
74 
Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-4 Trench warfare. 
defense. Army A is then forced to retreat and make a stand at the second 
trench (line A2). In the stock market, line Ax represents resistance, and once 
it is overcome, this signifies a change in the balance between buyers and 
sellers in favor of the buyers, so that prices will advance quickly until new 
resistance is encountered. The second line of defense, line A2, then repre┬Ł
sents resistance to a further advance. 
On the other hand, army B might break through A2 quite easily, but the 
farther it advances without time to consolidate its gains, the more likely it 
is to become overextended, and the greater is the probability of its suffer┬Ł
ing a serious setback from a counterattack when it reaches the next line of 
defense. At some point, therefore, it makes more sense for this successful 
force to wait and consolidate its gains. 
If prices in financial markets extend too far without having time to digest 
their gains, they too are more likely to face a sharp and seemingly unex┬Ł
pected reversal. This is another application of the second rule for identify┬Ł
ing the significance of a support or resistance level described in Chapter 3. 
Introducing the Reversal 
Rectangle and the Psychological 
Conditions Contributing to Its 
Formation 
The trading range separating rising and falling price trends discussed here 
is a pattern known as a rectangle. The rectangle in Fig. 6-5, which marks the 
turning point between the bull and bear phases, is termed a reversal pattern. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 75 
Figure 6-5 Downside breakout signal. 
The actual reversal signal is given when the price breaks decisively through 
the lower horizontal trendline. Reversal patterns at market tops are known 
as distribution because the security is said to be "distributed" from strong, 
informed participants to weak, uninformed ones. The underlying psychol┬Ł
ogy is that during the formation of the rectangle, the news is good, and unin┬Ł
formed market participants, hearing it for the first time, are encouraged to 
buy. Forecasts are also quite rosy at this time, so little risk is perceived from 
the long side. Every transaction has to have two parties, a buyer and a seller. 
For their part, the sellers, or distributors, have a different idea. They had 
been carefully buying on the way up in anticipation of the good news. Now 
that the news is materializing, it is time to sell, and who better to sell to than 
those uninformed participants who are hearing the good news for the first 
time? This kind of activity has given rise to the well-known expression "buy 
on the rumor, sell on the fact." 
Price patterns, including rectangles, that develop at market bottoms are 
called accumulation formations (where the security passes from weak, unin┬Ł
formed participants to strong, informed ones; see Fig. 6-6). In this situation, 
the underlying psychology is reversed: The sellers, having seen the price of 
their security move lower, decide to sell when the bad news and forecasts of 
more to come start to filter through the investment community. By the same 
token, potential buyers had previously held off because they wanted to get 
the bad news out of the way. The emergence of discouraging reports is there┬Ł
fore one of the signals that these so-called strong buyers had been waiting 
for. Another might be a sign that things are going to improve down the road. 
This process is called accumulation because informed buyers are said to be 
accumulating the security in anticipation of better times ahead. These are 
--- PAGE 43 ---
76 
Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-6 Upside breakout signal. 
said to be strong buyers because they are not easily put off by discouraging 
news. Their focus is on the future, and only when they see signs of poorer 
than expected developments down the road are they likely to liquidate. 
When you think of it in very simple terms, the top reversal rectangle is 
nothing more than a sophisticated variation of a signal that a series of ris┬Ł
ing peaks and troughs has been reversed. A bottom formation is simply the 
opposite. 
We can also appreciate that these patterns incorporate all the basic build┬Ł
ing blocks that have already been covered: peak-and-trough analysis, sup┬Ł
port and resistance, and trendline analysis. It is also important to understand 
that a reversal pattern must have something to reverse. In other words, all 
reversal patterns must be preceded by a prior trend in the opposite direc┬Ł
tion from the reversal signal. Tops must be preceded by uptrends and bot┬Ł
toms by downtrends. 
Consolidation Rectangles 
If the rectangle following an uptrend is completed with a victory for the buy┬Ł
ers as the price pushes through the upper line AA (see Fig. 6-7), a reversal 
does not develop because the breakout above AA reaffirms the underlying 
trend. In this case, the corrective phase associated with the formation of the 
rectangle temporarily interrupts the bull market and becomes a consolida┬Ł
tion pattern. Such formations are also referred to as continuation patterns. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 77 
Figure 6-7 Upside continuation breakout signal. 
Some price patterns show up only in a continuation mode; these are dis┬Ł
cussed in Chapter 12. 
During the period in which the pattern is being formed, there is no way 
of knowing in advance which way the price will ultimately break. It should 
always be assumed, then, that the prevailing trend is in existence until it is proved 
to have been reversed. If we are faithfully applying the weight-of-the-evidence 
approach, it may be possible to anticipate a possible reversal if the other indi┬Ł
cators are pointing in that direction. However, the pattern itself can never be 
categorized as a reversal type until the reversal is actually signaled. 
A continuation or consolidation rectangle in a downtrend is shown in 
Fig. 6-8. An example is featured in Chart 6-1, for the copper price. 
What Constitutes a Rectangle? 
In the example in Fig. 6-5, the upper and lower boundaries of the rectan┬Ł
gle were each touched on at least three occasions by the two horizontal 
trendlines. However, it was also possible to construct the rectangle using the 
first two points. Would that have constituted a valid pattern? The answer is 
yes. For the rationale for this, we need to examine the psychology underly┬Ł
ing the formation of the pattern. Remember, the transition period is noth┬Ł
ing less than a battle between buyers and sellers. If the battle is extended 
by the two boundaries being touched or approached on more than two 
occasions, this means that the conflict between the two parties is more 
--- PAGE 44 ---
78 Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-8 Downside continuation breakout signal. 
significant. It also implies that the bearish implications of the rectangle will 
be stronger. We can even go so far as to say that the more times the outer bound┬Ł
aries of a rectangle have been touched or approached, the greater the significance of 
the pattern. It goes back to the second rule described in Chapter 4 concern┬Ł
ing the significance of a trendline. The same holds true for the horizontal 
trendlines that form a rectangle. Let's return to our military analogy again. 
Chart 6-1 Copper, daily. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 79 
The longer the battle between the two trenches, the more exhausted the 
combatants will be. Thus the victory, when it comes, will be that much more 
decisive. 
You may have noticed that I have used the word approached as well as 
touched. This is important, because in real life you will often find that the 
construction of the upper and lower boundaries of a rectangle is not as pre┬Ł
cise as that in Fig. 6-5. I regard a close approach to any trendline, includ┬Ł
ing the outer boundaries of a rectangle, as being almost as valid as an actual 
contact. After all, if the price comes close to a boundary and then reverses, 
it definitely reinforces this level as a support or resistance zone. 
The Significance of Any Given 
Price Pattern 
The principles of price pattern construction and interpretation can be 
applied to any time frame, from one-minute bars all the way to monthly or 
even annual charts. However, the significance of a price formation for a spe┬Ł
cific time frame is a direct function of the formation's size and depth. 
We have already established that a rectangle whose boundaries have been 
touched many times is more significant than one whose boundaries have 
been touched only twice. We can extend this idea by saying that the longer 
a pattern takes to complete, the greater the number of fluctuations within it; and the 
deeper its trading range, the more substantial the following move is likely to be. 
Let's consider these three factors in turn. 
1. Time Frames 
The longer the time frame, the more significant the pattern. A pattern that 
shows up on a monthly chart is likely to be far more significant than one 
on an intraday chart, and so forth. In addition, the longer a pattern takes 
to develop in a particular time frame, the greater its significance within that 
time frame. Let's say we are looking at a daily chart and we spot two for┬Ł
mations. The first takes ten days to complete and the second four weeks. 
Clearly the four-week battle between buyers and sellers is much greater and 
more involved than the ten-day encounter. Consequently, when the out┬Ł
come is resolved, the ensuing price move is likely to be much greater. I use 
the word likely because this is a generality. Most of the time the larger pat┬Ł
tern will be more important, but not every time. In technical analysis, we are 
dealing in probabilities, never certainties. This means that small patterns will 
occasionally be followed by large moves, but normally it is the larger ones 
that are. 
--- PAGE 45 ---
80 Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Let's compare an accumulation pattern at a price low with the construc┬Ł
tion of a building. It is just as important to build a strong base from which 
prices can rise as it is to build a large, strong, deep foundation upon which 
to construct a skyscraper. In the case of security prices, the foundation is an 
accumulation pattern that represents an area of indecisive combat between 
buyers and sellers. During an accumulation phase, more sophisticated 
investors and professionals are positioning or accumulating the security in 
anticipation of improved conditions six to nine months ahead. As men┬Ł
tioned earlier, ownership is being transferred from weak, uninformed 
traders or investors to strong and knowledgeable hands. Consequently, the 
longer the pattern takes to complete and the greater the level of activity 
within it, the more significant the accumulation process and therefore the 
stronger the technical position. 
The reverse is true at market tops, where a substantial amount of distri┬Ł
bution inevitably results in a protracted period of price erosion. 
2. The Significance of Pattern Fluctuations 
The greater the number of fluctuations within a pattern, the greater the sig┬Ł
nificance of that pattern. When the price action has been at a stalemate for 
a long time and investors and traders have become used to buying at one 
price and selling at the other, a move beyond either limit represents a fun┬Ł
damental change and has great psychological significance. 
In 1972 and 1973 the commodity markets experienced a huge run-up. 
Chart 6-2 shows the CRB Composite. You can see that the rally was preceded 
by a multiyear trading range. There was no way of knowing that the break┬Ł
out from the range would be followed by such a spectacular advance. Even 
so, the sheer size of the battle between buyers and sellers over many years 
would have indicated that when a resolution finally did take place, it would 
most likely signal an above-average price trend. 
3. The Significance of Pattern Depth 
The deeper a pattern, the greater its significance. The depth of a forma┬Ł
tion also determines its significance. Consider the trench war analogy once 
more. If the opposing trenches are very close together, say within 100 yards, 
this means that the victorious assault, when it comes, will be less significant 
than if they are separated by several miles. In that case, the battles will have 
been much more intense and the victory that much greater. The same is 
true in the financial markets. The breaching of a wide trading range gen┬Ł
erally has far greater psychological significance than the breaching of a 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 81 
Chart 6-2 CRB Composite, 1957-1982, daily. 
narrow one. Psychology, as expressed in market prices, tends to move in pro┬Ł
portion. The greater the (proportionate) swing within the pattern, the 
greater the subsequent move is likely to be. If you get wide price swings dur┬Ł
ing the formation of the pattern, you are also likely to get wide swings after 
it has been completed. 
Having said that, it is also important to note that whenever you see a very 
tight and constrained trading range, this indicates that the battle between 
buyers and sellers is very evenly balanced. This is especially true when the 
level of activity shrinks to almost nothing. When that balance is tipped one 
way or the other, you will often find that prices move quite quickly and to 
a greater degree than is suggested by the measuring implication. We see 
an example in Fig. 6-24, where a pretty sharp decline follows the relatively 
narrow rectangle. Perhaps the guiding light in this is to see how many times 
the upper and lower boundaries have been touched or approached. The 
greater the number of times, the greater the significance of the line as a 
support or resistance zone, and therefore the more decisive the victory. 
Measuring Implications 
Technical analysis is best at identifying trend changes at an early stage and 
not so useful in forecasting how far a trend will extend. Price pattern 
--- PAGE 46 ---
82 Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-9 Rectangle top measuring objective. 
interpretation is one exception, since the construction of these formations 
offers some limited forecasting possibilities. 
Nearly all price patterns obtain measuring objectives from their depth. 
The rectangle is no exception. Figure 6-9 shows a rectangle that has formed 
and completed a top (distribution). The measuring implication of this for┬Ł
mation is the vertical distance between its outer boundaries, i.e., the distance 
between lines AA and BB projected downward from line BB. 
In many cases, the price trend will extend beyond the objective. In really 
strong moves, it will achieve multiples of it. We can take the process a step 
further by stating that the various multiples of the objective can become 
important support and resistance areas in their own right. Time and again, 
these price objective areas turn out to be important support or resistance 
points. Unfortunately, there is no way to determine where the actual junc┬Ł
ture point will be for any rally or reaction. This emphasizes the principle 
that in technical analysis, there is no known way of consistently determin┬Ł
ing the duration of a price movement. It is possible only to speculate on 
the probability that a specific area will prove to be a support or resistance 
zone. 
Consequently, while this measuring formula offers a rough guide, it is usu┬Ł
ally a minimum expectation. An example for a multiple-objective downside 
break is shown in Fig. 6-10. Here we see the price sink by three times the 
original objective. These multiples of the objective can be just as important 
in forecasting a probable pivotal point on the way back up, as we can see in 
the very right-hand part of the chart. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 83 
Figure 6-10 Rectangle top multiple measuring objective. 
Arithmetic versus Logarithmic 
Scaling 
The choice of arithmetic or logarithmic scaling is really important when 
measuring implications are being considered. This is because the method 
used determines the actual level of the objective. To recap, in arithmeti┬Ł
cally scaled charts, any given vertical space reflects the same dollar or point 
amount. Thus, we'll say that one inch represents $2, both at the lower end 
of the chart, in the $2 to $5 range, and at higher levels, such as the $100 
to $110 range. All units of measure are plotted using the same vertical dis┬Ł
tance. Prices plotted on a ratio or logarithmic scale show identical distances 
for identical percentage moves. Thus, one inch could represent a 20 per┬Ł
cent move anywhere on the chart. 
Fortunately, almost all computer software gives the user the option of 
choosing between arithmetic and logarithmic scales. 
The importance of using logarithmic scales whenever possible is shown 
in Fig. 6-1 la and b. In a, the price has traced out and broken down from a 
rectangle. Projecting the vertical distance between 200 and 100 downward 
gives an objective of 0, clearly a very unlikely possibility. On the other hand, 
Fig. 6-116 gives the same projection based on a logarithmic scale. In this case, 
a more realistic objective of 50 is obtained. 
If a rectangle appears as a bottom reversal pattern, the measuring rules 
remain consistent with those given for the distribution formation. The only 
difference is that we project the objective and multiples of the objective in 
an upward, not a downward, direction. The exact same principles also apply 
--- PAGE 47 ---
84 Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-11 Measuring implication, (a) Arithmetic, (b) Ratio. 
to continuation rectangles. Figure 6-12 shows an upside breakout from a rec┬Ł
tangle that forms during a bullish trend. Note that in this case, the price 
does not reach its upside objective immediately, but does so after a small 
rally and reaction. This is why the objective is described by the term ulti┬Ł
mate Most people buy the breakout on the assumption that they will make 
more or less instant profits as the price moves straight to the objective, but 
that is not necessarily the case. 
Rctracement Moves 
A great deal of the time, when the price breaks out from a pattern, the ini┬Ł
tial thrust is followed by a corrective move back to the upper or lower 
reaches of the formation, depending on the direction of the breakout, this 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 85 
Figure 6-12 Upside continuation rectangle measuring objective. 
is known as a retracement move, and it offers an additional entry point, often 
under substantially less emotional conditions. The retracement serves two 
functions. First, it helps to correct the excessive emotion associated with the 
breakout and bring people back to earth. From here, it is possible for the new 
trend to extend on a more sound basis. Second, it acts as a test of the break┬Ł
out. A downside retracement will find support at the breakout point, and an 
upside one will find resistance at the lower boundary of the pattern as these 
two zones reverse their former roles. 
Retracements, then, represent normal price behavior, and although they 
can be frustrating, they are nothing to get concerned about. Indeed, the 
breakout itself is often a volatile, illiquid affair as one side or the other heads 
for the entrance or exit, depending on the direction of the breakout. As a 
result, orders are often executed with horrendous fills. Price activity during 
the retracement process, on the other hand, is relatively quieter. This means 
that buying or selling can be undertaken in a much more controlled envi┬Ł
ronment. Figure 6-13 shows that it is often a good idea to wait for a retrace┬Ł
ment in a rising trend and buy as the price signals that the retracement is over. 
Cancellations 
If the minimal objective proves to be the ultimate extension of the new trend, 
a substantial amount of accumulation or distribution, whichever is appro┬Ł
priate, will typically have to occur before prices can move in their previous 
direction. Thus, a two-year rectangle might be completed and the upward 
--- PAGE 48 ---
86 Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-13 Buy on the retracement breakout. 
price objective reached. Even though a further price rise does not take place, 
it is still usually necessary for a top (distribution) of approximately the same 
size as the previous accumulation (in this case, two years) to be formed before 
a valid downtrend can take place. An example is shown in Fig. 6-14. 
Confirmation of a Valid Breakout 
So far, it has been assumed that any move out of the price pattern, how┬Ł
ever small, constitutes a valid signal of a trend reversal (or resumption, if 
the pattern is one of consolidation). Quite often, misleading moves known 
as whipsaws occur, so it is helpful to establish certain criteria to minimize 
the possibility of misinterpretation. Conventional wisdom holds that you 
should wait for a 3 percent penetration of the boundaries before concluding 
that the breakout is valid. A rule of this nature filters out a substantial num┬Ł
ber of misleading moves, even though the resulting signals are less timely. 
Figure 6-14 The cancellation effect. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 87 
The 3 percent rule was developed in the first part of the twentieth cen┬Ł
tury, when market participants' holding periods were much longer and 
weekly and monthly charts were more popular. Today, with the use of intra-
day charts, 3 percent could represent the complete move and then some! 
I have no basic objection to the 3 percent rule for longer-term price move┬Ł
ments, where the fluctuations are much greater. However, the best approach 
is a commonsense one based on experience and judgment in each partic┬Ł
ular case. It would be very convenient to be able to say that anything over 
a specific percentage amount represents a valid breakout, but unfortunately, 
a lot depends on the time frame being considered and the volatility of the 
specific security in question. 
For example, electric utilities are very stable in their price action com┬Ł
pared to mining stocks, where the volatility is far greater. Applying the same 
percentage breakout rule to both obviously doesn't make sense. What con┬Ł
stitutes a decisive breakout, with the chances of a whipsaw being consider┬Ł
ably reduced, is thus very much a matter of personal judgment based on 
experience, trial, and error. This judgment should take into consideration 
such factors as the type of trend being monitored, the volatility of the secu┬Ł
rity, volume, and momentum characteristics. 
Ironically, a false breakout here and there actually adds validity to a spe┬Ł
cific support or resistance zone. Say, for example, that after great effort I 
am able to jump from the basement through the ceiling of the ground floor, 
but the effort to do this leaves me with just my head above the floor and my 
arms and hands also resting on the floor. Technically, I suppose I am on the 
ground floor, but it's still taking an awful lot of effort to maintain this posi┬Ł
tion. Unless I am able to drag my feet up and actually stand on the ground 
floor, I am likely to slip back through the ceiling and end up where I started. 
In this situation, my false "breakout" above resistance (the ceiling) has 
emphasized the importance of that resistance. It also means that I have 
expended a great deal of effort trying to get to the ground floor, and, as a 
result, I now need an extended period in which to gain enough strength to 
make another attempt. Figure 6-15 shows an example of a rectangle con┬Ł
taining a whipsaw breakout. 
Another factor that can help in deciding early on whether a breakout is 
valid is that a valid breakout should hold for several periods. For example, 
you may observe a decisive upside breakout from a rectangle on a daily 
chart, but if the price cannot hold above the breakout level for more than 
one day, the signal is highly suspect. Often the technical position is worse 
after such breakouts because those that cannot hold indicate exhaustion, 
and exhaustion moves are often followed by strong price trends in the direction oppo┬Ł
site to that indicated by the (false) breakout. At the very least we would expect 
an exhaustion breakout to be followed by an extended period of trading 
within the body of the pattern until the technical structure can regroup. 
--- PAGE 49 ---
88 Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Figure 6-15 Identifying a whipsaw breakout. 
Once the price moves away from the pattern, the odds favor a valid break┬Ł
out. But what happens if the price breaks back into the body of the pattern 
again? Is the breakout still valid? If not, where is the point at which you pull 
the plug on the whole thing? 
Anticipating When Things Might 
Go Wrong 
One of the first things that should be done upon entering any business ven┬Ł
ture is weighing the possible risk against the potential reward. The same is 
true in the financial markets. Most people, upon seeing a price break out 
from a pattern, focus on potential profits as they calculate the probable 
upside objective. Experienced professionals, on the other hand, always con┬Ł
sider the risk as an equal, if not a more important, part of the equation. If 
the reward/risk ratio is not greater than 3:1, the trade or investment is prob┬Ł
ably not worth initiating. 
This means that whenever you are planning on opening a new position 
based on a price pattern breakout, it is important that you decide ahead of time 
what type of price action would cause you to conclude that the breakout was a whip-
saw. In this exercise, we need to remember that when an upside breakout 
develops, the probabilities favor higher prices. This continues to be the case 
during the retracement move. However, as soon as the price moves back into 
the body of the pattern, the odds of higher prices begin to narrow. The ques┬Ł
tion is, "When do the odds move below the 50 percent point?" Unfortunately, 
there are no hard and fast rules that can be said to work on all occasions. Each 
situation has to be judged on its own merits, and it's better to do the exercise 
before you enter the position than while you are holding it. Otherwise emo┬Ł
tion will creep into what will probably turn out to be an ad hoc decision. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 89 
Figure 6-16 Identifying a whipsaw breakout. 
The first step is to bear in mind that once the upper boundary of the 
pattern has been breached following an upside breakout, this is similar to 
saying that support has been violated. The same will be true, but in reverse, 
for a downside breakout. This puts us on red alert until either the price 
breaks back out of the pattern again or other support areas are violated. You 
can see that in Fig. 6-15, the breaking of the upper boundary of the for┬Ł
mation also signals a series of declining peaks and troughs. In my view, this 
would be sufficient evidence to exit the position. Markets are no more and 
no less than an expression of people in action. Since individuals can and do 
change their minds, so can markets. You will be far better off paying attention 
to the market's message than to your own personal hopes and fears. When 
the situation is no longer flagging high probabilities of a price rise, it is better 
to take a small loss than to let pride and stubbornness lead to a big one. 
Let's say that the price fell straight back into the pattern without the ben┬Ł
efit of a peak-and-trough reversal. What should we do then? It very much 
depends on the chart. If there are no obvious support points, many traders 
believe that a penetration of the 50 percent mark is the place to exit. In this 
case, the 50 percent mark is the central point between the two horizontal 
lines that make up the rectangle. An example is shown in Fig. 6-16. In this 
case, the signal to sell would develop as the price crossed the 50 percent level. 
Figure 6-17 shows another example in which the price breaks below a pre┬Ł
vious minor low. In this instance, the break develops within the pattern. 
Figure 6-17 Identifying a whipsaw breakout. 
--- PAGE 50 ---
90 Part II: Traditional Patterns 
Remember, the minor low is a potential support point. If the price breaks 
below both the upper boundary and the minor low, then two support points 
have been violated. Such action is certainly not what was expected during 
the original breakout. If you were considering a purchase, there would be 
no grounds for buying at this point. Why, then, if you are long, should the 
decision be any different? It shouldn't, of course, but it is often difficult to 
take a loss. Invariably hope of a rally seeps into the psyche, and a rationale 
for staying with the position develops. Unfortunately, markets are not as sen┬Ł
timental as their participants and often show no mercy. That's why it is impor┬Ł
tant to take quick action as soon as the probabilities of an advance decrease. 
Another possibility is shown in Fig. 6-18, where it was possible to construct 
a small up trendline and observe its violation. The penetration of that line 
then serves as a support violation and a sell signal. 
In all these examples, it would be important to place a stop below the var┬Ł
ious support points: the 50 percent mark, the previous low, the up trend-
line, and so on. As previously mentioned, these stop points should be set 
ahead of time. By doing this, you will have calculated the loss that you are 
willing to accept and the point at which the original premise for the tradeŌĆö 
i.e., the breakoutŌĆöis no longer operative. Failure to take such action ahead 
of time means that when things go wrong, the actual decision to sell is more 
likely to be based on emotional stress caused by a reaction to a news event 
or something similar rather than on a logical, preset plan. 
The examples we have dealt with here relate to upside breakouts, since 
that is the direction in which most market participants look. However, in 
the case of short positions initiated through downside breakouts, the prin┬Ł
ciples remain the same, except that the direction is reversed. In this situa┬Ł
tion, resistance areas are substituted for support. An example is shown in 
Fig. 6-19 where a stop would be placed above the last rally experienced by 
the pattern prior to the downside breakout. A move above this point would 
not necessarily invalidate the formation. However, it would certainly place 
Figure 6-18 Identifying a whipsaw breakout. 
Using Rectangles, a Case Study for All Patterns 91 
Figure 6-19 Placing a stop after a downside breakout. 
the odds of its succeeding below 50/50, whereas at the time of the down┬Ł
side breakout they would have been well above 50/50. Consequently, if the 
advance above the dashed trendline invalidates the reason for going short, 
why continue to hold the trade? 
Volume Considerations 
So far we have considered only price in our analysis, but volume is an impor┬Ł
tant independent variable that can help us obtain a more accurate reflec┬Ł
tion of crowd psychology. To quickly recap, volume usually goes with the 
trend, i.e., it expands with a rising trend of prices and contracts with a declin┬Ł
ing one. This is a normal relationship, and anything that diverges from it 
should be considered a warning sign that the prevailing price trend may be 
in the process of reversing. Volume is always measured in relation to the 
recent past. Thus, heavy volume is related to volume 20 to 30 bars or so ago, 
not to volume, say, 10 years ago, as institutional changes may have perma┬Ł
nently increased the level of activity. 
In the case of the rectangle, and with most other patterns, it is normal 
for the trend of volume to contract as the formation develops. Activity may 
continue to fluctuate along with the price, but with the benefit of hindsight, 
we would expect to see the various peaks and troughs of volume shrink as 
the pattern develops, along the lines of Fig. 6-20. As the pattern nears com┬Ł
pletion, disinterest prevails and volume often dries up. 
The quality of an accumulation formation is certainly improved if volume 
expands on the upside break. Sometimes it is even possible to draw a trend-
line joining the lower-volume peaks, as shown in Fig. 6-20. It is the upward 
surge in trading activity that confirms the validity of the breakout because 
it signals the enthusiasm of buyers. A similar move on declining volume 